(2022) 7 Supreme Court Cases 443 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE UDAY U. LALIT, S. RAVINDRA BHAT AND BELA M. TRIVEDI, JJ.)
MOHD. FIROZ
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 612 of 2019-, decided on April 19, 2022
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 21 and 39-A - Fair trial - Challenge to
fairness of trial on account of trial being expedited by the trial court, held
not tenable, if the due procedure appears to be followed during the course
of trial
- Material did not indicate due procedure being not followed or that the
appellant suffered on account of deprivation of the legal aid or legal
assistance to him - Hence, plea as to absence of fair trial, held, not tenable,
particularly when such plea not raised before the Courts below during trial
and in appeal - In absence of any material on record, inference also
declined to be drawn that because of media pressure, the trial was not
conducted in fair manner - Duty of Courts conducting trial and appeal,
stated
- Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 302, 363, 366, 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m) -
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 - Ss. 5(i) and 5(m)
r/w S. 6 - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, S. 304
Held :
The concept of fair trial has been enshrined not only in Articles 21 and 39-A of
the Constitution of India, but also in Section 304 CrPC. Free and fair trial is sine qua
non of Article 21 of the Constitution and, thus, the procedure in criminal trials must
be right, just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. Article 39-A of the
Constitution provides for free legal aid to the poor and weaker sections of the
society and ensures justice for all. Section 304 CrPC further provides that where in
a trial before the Court of Session, the accused is not represented by a pleader, and
where it appears to the court that the accused has no sufficient means to engage a
pleader, the court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State.
The Supreme Court also time and again has emphasised the right to a fair trial by
the courts, in the letter and spirit of the right to life and personal liberty flowing from
the various guarantees enshrined in the Constitution. Right to fair and speedy trial
applies as much to the victim as the accused. Right to get speedy justice applies to
the victim as well. Hence considering the gravity and seriousness of the crime, if the
trial is expedited by the court, it could not to be said that such trial was not fair to
the accused. Of course, while expediting the trial, it is imperative on the court to
see that the due procedure is followed during the course of trial.
(Para 48)
The trial court did provide legal assistance to both the accused by appointing
a
lawyer at the expense of the State, who had thoroughly cross-examined all the
witnesses examined by the prosecution, and had also examined two witnesses on
behalf of acquitted accused. Apart from the fact that no such contention was raised
during the course of trial or even before the High Court in the two separate appeals
filed by the accused represented by two separate lawyers, no such contention has
been raised by the appellant-accused even in the memorandum of the present
appeal. The oral submission made by the Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
the accused at the fag end of his arguments that there was no fair trial conducted,
without substantiating the said submission, cannot be entertained. Even otherwise,
it may noted that during the course of recording the further statement, the
appellant-accused had responded to the incriminating circumstances brought to his
notice, after fully understanding them as transpiring from the answers recorded by
the court. It is possible that the incident in question would have created an anguish
amongst the public at large as also amongst the media, nonetheless in absence of
any material on record, no inference could be drawn that because of such media
pressure, the trial was not conducted in fair manner.
(Para 49)
The court conducting the trial/appeal is not only obliged to protect the rights of
the accused but also the rights of the victim, and the interest of the society at
large. The Judge presiding over the criminal trial has not only to see that innocent
man is not punished but has also to see that guilty man does not escape. Both are
his public duties required to be discharged very diligently to maintain the public
confidence and uphold the majesty of the law.
(Para 50)
(Cri) 8, cited
B. Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 302, 363, 366, 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m) -
Rape and murder of minor after abduction - Circumstantial evidence -
Admission by accused in his S. 313 CrPC statement, last seen theory,
conduct of absconding along with DNA testing - Establishing guilt of the
accused - Absence of explanations for all the established incriminating
circumstances - Taken together, all these circumstances cumulatively
establish guilt of appellant - Hence, conviction confirmed
- As per prosecution, acquitted co-accused visited house of informant
(victim's mother) along with appellant and requested her to provide
accommodation to appellant for a day and, when informant refused to
provide such accommodation, acquitted co-accused left and appellant sat for
a while at courtyard of house of informant, where victim aged about four
years was playing with her brother R - After some time, informant found
her daughter and appellant missing and she found her son R coming home
with some bananas and he told his mother that appellant had taken victim
along with him
- On next day victim found lying unconscious in a field with blood oozing
from her mouth and nostrils and as per medical evidence, rape was
committed on her - Accused during his examination under S. 313 CrPC,
admitted his visit to the house of the victim on the previous day evening of
the fateful day
- Held, though such admission could not be made the basis for convicting
the accused, but could be taken aid of to lend assurance to the prosecution
evidence
- Time gap between the victim being last seen with the appellant and
the time when she was found injured and unconscious in the field was hardly
12 hours - Further, the last seen theory also stood proved by the
testimony of related witnesses including victim's grandmother, aunt,
informant-mother, brother R and the fruit vendor, who clearly stated that
the appellant along with two children had come to his shop to purchase the
bananas and that he had given three bananas to R and asked him to leave
for home, and the appellant had taken the victim with him
- Relationship of these witnesses with the informant, held, not material
to disbelieve their testimony, particularly when no concrete defence taken
during the cross-examination of any of these witnesses - Some minor
discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses also, held, not material and
declined to be treated as major contradictions
- Thus, theory of "last seen together" being established against the
appellant, absence of explanation on his part as to how he parted the
company of the victim taken as additional factor against him
- Further, after the incident, accused ran away to his native place in
another State and, this conduct of the accused in absconding away also
proved on the record
- DNA profile obtained from the hair found from the place of incident and
the DNA profile obtained from the source of blood sample of the appellant
also found identical, and confirmed that the hair strands were of the
appellant only, as per the opinion given by expert - Resultantly, conviction
affirmed
- Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 - Ss. 5(i) and 5
(m) r/w S. 6 - Rape and murder of minor after abduction - Circumstantial
evidence - Conviction confirmed - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 313
- Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 106 - Last seen evidence - Once established,
onus falls on accused to explain how he parted the company of the victim -
Evidence
Act,
1872
S.
45
Criminal Trial
-
Medical
Jurisprudence/Evidence - DNA test - Presence of accused at place of
incident - Established based on DNA extracted from hair found at place of
incident and from blood of accused - Circumstantial Evidence
-
Abscondence - Adverse inference when may drawn therefrom
(Paras 36 to 47)
Held :
In the instant case also, though the conviction of the appellant-accused could
not be made merely on his admission of the circumstance of his visit to the house
of the informant on the previous day evening of the fateful day, such admission
could certainly be taken aid of to lend assurance to the evidence of the prosecution.
(Para 38)
The next and most important circumstance was with regard to the theory of
"last seen together" propounded by the prosecution. According to the mother of
the victim, when she was searching for her daughter, she saw that her son R was
coming with a polythene bag containing bananas, and R told her that the said
bananas were given by the appellant, and that he had taken the victim along with
him. The said R examined as PW 31, though a young boy, had fully corroborated
the said version of her mother, in his deposition before the court. The fruit vendor,
(PW 4), had also
stated that the appellant along with two children had come to his shop to purchase
the bananas and that he had given three bananas to R and asked him to leave
home, and he had taken the victim with him.
(Para 39)
The evidence of these witnesses could not be disbelieved merely because they
happened to be the relatives of the informant. Pertinently there was no concrete
defence taken during the cross-examination of any of these witnesses examined by
the prosecution. Some minor discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses could
not be said to be major contradictions to throw away the case of the prosecution
overboard or disbelieve the prosecution. Nothing more could be expected from R
who was aged about four years than what he had stated in his deposition, more
particularly, when his testimony was found to be truthful and when the identity of
the accused was not in dispute. Hence, it was also duly proved that the appellant-
accused had taken the victim with him from the shop of fruit vendor in the evening
hours of the alleged incident, which was a very strong circumstance proved against
the accused.
(Para 40)
Once the theory of "last seen together" was established, the accused was
expected to offer some explanation as to under which circumstances, he had
parted the company of the victim. It hardly needs to be reiterated that in the
criminal jurisprudence, the entire burden of proving the guilt of the accused rests on
the prosecution, nonetheless if the accused does not throw any light upon the facts
which are proved to be within his special knowledge in view of Section 106 of the
Evidence Act, such failure on the part of the accused may also provide an additional
link in the chain of circumstances required to be proved against him. Of course,
Section 106 of the Evidence Act does not shift the burden of the prosecution on the
accused, nor requires the accused to furnish an explanation with regard to the facts
which are especially within his knowledge, nonetheless furnishing or non-furnishing
of the explanation by the accused would be a very crucial fact, when the theory of
"last seen together" as propounded by the prosecution is proved against him, to
know as to how and when the accused parted the company of the victim.
(Paras 41 to 44)
In the instant case, though it was duly proved that the appellant-accused had
taken the victim with him from the shop of fruit vendor, neither any explanation
was offered by the appellant in his further statement under Section 313 CrPC nor
any concrete defence was taken during the course of the cross-examination of the
witnesses. It is pertinent to note that after the alleged incident, he had run away to
his native place at Bihar. Admittedly he was arrested therefrom and was brought
back after obtaining the transit remand from the court concerned at Bhagalpur. The
said conduct of the accused in absconding away also was a circumstance duly
proved by the prosecution against him.
(Para 45)
So far as the proximity of time is concerned, the time gap between the victim
being lastly seen with the appellant-accused and the time when she was found
injured and unconscious in the field was hardly 12 hours. The said injuries had
resulted into her death.
(Para 46)
Thus, coupled with the other evidence, the prosecution had proved the close
proximity of time when the victim was last seen with the appellant and when the
victim was found unconscious and in injured condition, which ultimately resulted into
her death. The DNA profile obtained from the hair found from the place of incident
and the DNA profile obtained from the source of blood sample of the appellant was
identical, and confirmed that the hair strands were of the appellant
only, as per the opinion at Ext. P-47 given by PW 25 Dr P, Scientific Officer, FSL.
(Para 47)
The Court, therefore, holds that the trial court had rightly convicted the appellant
-accused for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 376(2)(i), 376(2)(m),
363, 366 IPC and Section 5(i) read with Sections 6 and 5(m) read with Section 6
of the Pocso Act. The said order of conviction was affirmed by the High Court; and
is being further affirmed by the Supreme Court.
(Para 51)
542, relied on
affirmed
Masalti V. State of U.P., AIR 1965 SC 202; Ajay Singh V. State of Maharashtra,
C. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 313 - Examination of accused
under - Extent to which may be used against accused, including inculpatory
statement
- Held, though no conviction can be based on the statement of the
accused and the prosecution has to prove the guilt of the accused by leading
independent and cogent evidence, nonetheless when the accused makes
inculpatory and exculpatory statements, the inculpatory part of the
statement can be taken aid of to lend credence to the case of prosecution -
However, if the prosecution evidence does not inspire confidence to sustain
the conviction of the accused, the inculpatory part of his statement under S.
313 cannot be made the sole basis of his conviction
- Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 132 - Constitution of India - Art. 20(3) -
Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 302, 363, 366, 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m) -
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, Ss. 5(i) and 5(m)
r/w S. 6
(Paras 36 and 37)
D. Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 302, 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m) r/w S. 376-A
(as came into force w.e.f. 3-2-2013) - Death sentence - Non-mentioning
of S. 376-A in the charge - When not material
- Accused not only charged under S. 302 which is punishable with death
or life imprisonment, but also charged under Ss. 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m),
as covered in S. 376-A, which is also punishable up to death sentence
amongst other lesser punishments - Hence, non-mentioning of S. 376-A in
the charge, held, neither misled the accused, nor caused any failure of
justice - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, S. 215
Held :
Since the death of the victim was caused due to the injuries inflicted by the
appellant while committing offence under Sections 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m) IPC,
the provisions of Section 376-A IPC would also get attracted which had come into
force w.e.f. 3-2-2013 i.e. prior to the alleged incident in question, and which
provided for wide range of punishments up to death penalty. The High Court in the
impugned order, though made observation in this regard, did not consider it on the
ground that the charge under Section 376-A IPC was not framed by the Sessions
Court against the accused.
(Para 53)
However, it may be noted that in view of Section 215 CrPC an omission to state
the offence or its particulars in the charge could not be regarded as material, unless
the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it had occasioned a
failure of justice. In the instant case, the accused was already charged for the
offence under Section 302 IPC which is punishable with death or life imprisonment,
and was also charged for the offences under Sections 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m), as
covered in Section 376-A IPC, which is also punishable up to death sentence
amongst other lesser punishments. Hence, non-mentioning of Section 376-A in the
charge could not be said to have misled the accused, nor any failure of justice could
be said to have occasioned.
(Para 54)
E. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 300 Fourthly and Ss. 302, 376(2)(i) and 376
(2)(m) r/w S. 376-A - Death sentence - When not sustainable - Murder
falling principally under S. 300 Fourthly i.e. by commission of "imminently
dangerous" act - Hence, death sentence commuted to life imprisonment
with minimum 20 year non-remittable term
- Victim aged only four years, died because of monstrous acts of the
appellant, who suffocated her to such an extent that she left with no option
but to leave this world - However, the accused having consciously not
caused any injury with an intent to extinguish her life, the case, held, is
covered by S. 300 Fourthly and cannot be treated as rarest of the rare case
- Resultantly, death sentence, held, not sustainable - However, while
The surest way legal research!"
balancing the scales of retributive justice and restorative justice, sentence
of the life imprisonment for a minimum non-remittable term of 20 yrs
imposed - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, Ss. 354(3) and 235(2)
Held :
One of the most barbaric and ugly human faces has surfaced. A tiny bud like girl
was smothered by the appellant before she could blossom in this world. The
monstrous acts of the appellant suffocated the victim to such an extent that she
had no option but to leave this world. Once again, all the constitutional guarantees
have failed to protect the victim from the clutches of the demonising acts of the
appellant. In the opinion of the Court, any sympathy shown to the appellant would
lead to miscarriage of justice. However, in series of judgments, the Supreme Court
has not treated such case as the rarest of the rare case.
(Para 57)
The imposition of death penalty is required to be guided by the paramount
beacons of the legislative policy discernible from Sections 354(3) and 235(2) CrPC,
namely : (i) the extreme penalty can be inflicted only in the gravest cases of
extreme culpability; and (ii) in making the choice of the sentence. In addition to the
circumstances of the offence, due regard must be paid to the circumstances of the
offender also.
(Para 58)
In the present case, the facts are materially similar to the facts of Shatrughna
caused any injury with an intent to extinguish the life of the victim, and the offence
fell under Section 300 Fourthly IPC, and the Supreme Court in that case had
commuted the sentence of death penalty to life imprisonment.
(Para 59)
Considering the above, in this case also, it is deemed it proper to commute, and
accordingly the sentence of death is commuted to the sentence of imprisonment
for life, for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. Since, Section 376-A IPC
is also applicable to the facts of the case, considering the gravity and seriousness of
the offence, the sentence of imprisonment for the remainder of the appellant's
natural life would have been an appropriate sentence, however, the Supreme Court
is reminded of what Oscar Wilde has said - "The only difference between the saint
and the sinner is that every saint has a past and every sinner has a future".
(Para 60)
One of the basic principles of restorative justice as developed by the Supreme
Court over the years, also is to give an opportunity to the offender to repair the
damage caused, and to become a socially useful individual, when he is released
from the jail. The maximum punishment prescribed may not always be the
determinative factor for repairing the crippled psyche of the offender. Hence, while
balancing the scales of retributive justice and restorative justice, it is appropriate to
impose upon the appellant-accused, the sentence of imprisonment for a period of
twenty years instead of imprisonment for the remainder of his natural life for the
offence under Section 376-A IPC.
(Para 61)
(Cri) 555, followed
SK-D/68854/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
B.H. Marlapalle, Senior Advocate [Ms Shreya Rastogi, Ms Harini
Raghupathy, Ms Trisha Chandran, Ramnesh Kr. Sahu and Satya Mitra
(Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
P.V. Yogeswaran, Additional Advocate General [Pashupathi Nath
Razdan (Advocate-on-Record), Kayesh Regg, Astik Gupta, Ms Sneh
Bairwa and Prakhar Srivastav, Advocates], for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Surajdeo Mahto V. State of Bihar
464a-b
Shatrughna Baban Meshram V. State of
Maharashtra
468g, 469a-b
M.P.
467g-h
M.P.
450d
Rajender V. State (NCT of Delhi)
463a
463e, 464c
450d, 452b-c, 467d
Singh V. State of Maharashtra
458e
Habibullah Sheikh (5) V. State of Gujarat
458f-g
Anbazhagan V. Supt. of Police
458f-g
Mohan Singh V. Prem Singh
460e-f
Birdhichand Sarda V. State of Maharashtra
459e-f
Singh V. State of Punjab
468f
Singh V. State of Punjab
467g, 468d-e, 468f, 468f-g
India
465g-h
Sahabrao Bobade V. State of Maharashtra
459g-h
Bihar
460g, 461e
18. AIR 1965 SC 202, Masalti V. State of U.P.
458a-b
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Bela M. Trivedi, J.- The present appeal was initially filed by the
appellant Bibi Sidhika, the mother of the accused Mohd. Firoz,
challenging the legality and validity of the impugned common
judgment and order dated 15-7-2014 passed by the High Court of
Judicature, Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur, in Mohd. Feroz, In re1. During
the pendency of the present appeal, the said appellant having expired,
the accused Firoz has been substituted as the appellant in view of the
order passed by this Court on 21-10-20212.
Case of the prosecution
2. The case of the prosecution as unfolded before the trial court was
that on 17-4-2013, at about 6.30 p.m., one Rakesh Choudhary (original
Accused 2) came to the house of the informant Ramkumari (mother of
the victim) along with an unknown person (the present appellant
original Accused 1) and requested the said Ramkumari and her mother
Himmabai to provide an accommodation to the said unknown person for
a day, however, Himmabai refused to provide such accommodation.
Thereafter, Rakesh Choudhary left and his friend sat for a while at the
courtyard of the house of the complainant, where the victim aged about
four years was playing with her brother Ramkishan and other cousins.
3. After some time, Ramkumari found that her daughter was missing
and the other person (Accused 1) was also not there. She along with
others tried to search her daughter at the nearby places, however, her
daughter was not found. After some time Ramkishan came with some
bananas and told Ramkumari that Bhaijaan (Accused 1) had taken the
victim with him. Ramkumari therefore went to Police Station Ghansaur
for lodging a missing report.
4. On the next day i.e. on 18-4-2013 morning, some villagers found
that one girl child was lying unconscious in the field of one Badri Yadav.
On receiving such information, Shyam Yadav, the brother of Ramkumari
went to the spot and found that the victim was lying unconscious and
blood was loozing from her
mouth and nostrils. He immediately took the victim first to the police
station and then to the Government Hospital at Ghansaur, however,
since the condition of the victim was deteriorating, she was shifted to
the hospital at Jabalpur. The doctors who examined and treated her
confirmed that a rape was committed on the victim. Considering her
serious condition, the victim was taken to Care Hospital at Nagpur,
however, on 29-4-2013, the victim expired at the said hospital.
5. Dr Pradeep Gangadhar Dixit, a professor and HOD in Forensic
Medicine Department, Medical College, Nagpur along with his
colleagues conducted the post-mortem of the dead body of the victim
at about 10.35 a.m. on 30-4-2013 and noted the external and internal
injuries on the body of the victim. The final cause of death was stated
to be "bronchopneumonia and cerebral hypoxia, which was caused by
smothering the nose and mouth".
6. In the meantime, Mr R.D. Barthi, In-charge Inspector, Police
Station, Ghansaur, on the missing person report given by Ramkumari
Bai had started investigation and found that the accused Firoz Khan
(the present appellant), who was working in Jhabua Power Plant had
taken away the victim deceitfully. He therefore registered an FIR being
No. 68 of 2013 against the accused at about 6.40 a.m. on 18-4-2013
for the offences under Sections 363 and 366 of the Penal Code, 1860.
The accused Rakesh Choudhary came to be arrested on 20-4-2013 and
the appellant-accused Firoz was arrested on 23-4-2013 from
Husainabad, Police Station Mojahidpur, Balsaur, Bhagalpur, Bihar.
7. The investigating officer after completing the investigation laid
the charge-sheet against both the accused before the trial court. The
accused Mohd. Firoz was charged for the offences under Sections 363,
366, 376(2)(i), 376(2)(m) and 302 IPC and under Sections 5(i), 5(m)
and Section 6 of the Protection of Children from the Sexual Offences
Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as "the Pocso Act"), and the accused
Rakesh Choudhary was charged for the offences under Sections 363
and 366 read with Section 34 and under Section 109 IPC and under
Sections 16/17 of the Pocso Act.
8. Both the accused having abjured their guilt and claimed to be
tried, the prosecution examined as many as 34 witnesses to prove their
guilt. Both the accused denied the allegations levelled against them in
their respective further statements recorded under Section 313 CrPC
and stated that they were falsely implicated in the case. Accused 2
Rakesh Choudhary in his defence examined two witnesses i.e. DW 1,
Virendra Choudhary and DW 2, Gopal Prasad Ahirwar.
9. The Sessions Court at Seoni after appreciating the evidence on
record convicted both the accused for the offences charged against
them and awarded death sentence to the accused Firoz for the offence
under Section 302 IPC and directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for a period of 7 years and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the offence under
Section 363, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years
and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the offence under Section 366 IPC, to
undergo life imprisonment and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the offences
under Sections 376(2)(i), 376(2)(m) IPC and under Sections 5(i) & 5
(m) read with Section 6 of the POCSO Act. The Sessions Court directed
the accused Rakesh Choudhary to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for a period of 7 years and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the offences under
Sections 363/34, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10
years and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the offences under Sections 366/34
and to undergo life imprisonment and pay fine of Rs 2000 for the
offence under Section 109 IPC and for the offences under Sections
16/17 of the Pocso Act.
10. The reference made by the Sessions Court to the High Court of
M.P. at Jabalpur, for the confirmation of the death sentence to the
accused Firoz was registered as Criminal Reference No. 9 of 2013. The
accused Mohd. Firoz had also filed an appeal being Criminal Appeal No.
2920 of 2013 and the accused Rakesh Choudhary had filed an appeal
being Criminal Appeal No. 3132 of 2013 before the High Court. The
High Court vide the impugned common judgment and order dated 15-7
-20141 allowed Criminal Appeal No. 3132 of 2013 filed by the accused
Rakesh Choudhary and acquitted him from the charges levelled against
him, however, dismissed Criminal Appeal No. 2920 of 2013 filed by the
accused Mohd. Firoz and confirmed the death sentence awarded to him.
Being aggrieved by the same, the appellant has preferred the present
appeal before this Court.
Evidence
11. In order to prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution had
examined three sets of witnesses. In the first set, the relatives and
acquaintances of the informant Ramkumari, mother of the victim, were
examined. The informant Ramkumari deposed inter alia that on 17-4-
2013 at about 7.00 p.m., when she came home after finishing her
work, she saw that one person (the accused Firoz Khan) was sitting on
a chair in the courtyard of her house and Rakesh Choudhary (the other
accused) was sitting on the platform of the courtyard. According to her,
Rakesh Choudhary was telling her mother Himmabai that "Amma
Bhaijaan will sleep here", however, her mother refused. After the said
conversation, she did not know where the said Choudhary had gone but
Bhaijaan (Firoz) kept sitting on the chair.
12. At that time, Ramkumari's daughters Pooja, Madhu, her
brother's son Ramkishan and her sister's son Nilesh all were playing in
the courtyard. She went inside the house and after some time when
she came out, she saw that her daughter Pooja and her brother's son
Ramkishan were not in the courtyard, and the said Firoz Bhaijaan was
also not seen. She therefore started searching Pooja and Ramkishan,
and she saw Ramkishan coming with bananas in a polythene bag. On
being inquired by her as to where Pooja was, Ramkishan told her that
Bhaijaan had taken Pooja along with him. She thereafter continued to
search for Pooja but could not find her.
13. Ramkumari, therefore, along with her sister Jyoti went to Police
Station, Ghansaur to lodge the report. The said report of missing person
was lodged at about 20 : 35 hours at Police Station, Ghansaur, (Ext. P-
1). She further deposed before the Court that on the next day, the
persons who go out to defecate in open came to her house and told her
brother Shyam that one girl was lying unconscious in the field. Her
brother, therefore, went to the field and found that the victim was lying
unconscious there and blood was oozing from
her nose and genital organs. Thereafter, she along with her mother
Himmabai and her brother Shyam took her daughter Pooja to the police
station and then to Ghansaur Hospital, however, Pooja remained
unconscious. Her daughter, thereafter, was taken to the Medical
College, Jabalpur, from Ghansaur Hospital and then to Nagpur by air for
treatment, where she was admitted in Care Hospital. Her daughter was
treated for about 8 days in the said hospital and she died on 29-4-
2013.
14. Ramkumari, PW 1 further deposed that the doctors of all the
places like Ghansaur, Jabalpur and Nagpur, where her daughter had
undergone the treatment had told that a rape was committed on her
and that an attempt was made to murder her by strangulating her
neck. After her death, Nagpur Police had registered a report (Ext. P-2).
During the course of her deposition, Ramkumari had identified the
accused Firoz present in the court and stated that he was the same
Bhaijaan. She also stated that the said Firoz had raped Pooja and
inflicted injuries which caused her death. The said version of PW 1
Ramkumari was fully supported by the witnesses PW 2 Madhu Yadav
who happened to be the sister of the deceased, PW 6 Himmabai who
happened to be the grandmother of the deceased and mother of
Ramkumari, PW 7 Preeti Yadav who happened to be the younger sister
of Ramkumari. They had stated to be present in the house when both
the accused Rakesh and Firoz had come to the house of Ramkumari.
15. The prosecution, in order to prove that the victim was last seen
together with the accused Firoz had examined PW 31 Ramkishan Yadav.
The said Ramkishan aged about four years happened to be the son of
PW 5 Shyam Yadav i.e. brother of Ramkumari. Ramkishan deposed
before the court inter alia that Firozbhai had come to their home and
then had taken him and Pooja to a fruit shop. Firozbhai had given him
three bananas and biscuits and thereafter asked him to go home,
however, had taken Pooja with him. Identifying the accused Firoz
sitting in the Court, Ramkishan had stated that he was Firoz Bhaijaan
who had taken her sister Pooja with him and thereafter Pooja was found
dead. He specifically denied in the cross-examination that after Firoz
Bhaijaan gave bananas and biscuits to him, Pooja also came along with
him.
16. PW 4 Nitin Namdev was the fruit seller. He deposed that on 17-4
-2013 at about 7.00 p.m., one person wearing a white shirt and black
full pant had come with one girl and a boy, both aged about four years,
and had purchased six bananas from his shop for Rs 20. He also
identified the accused Firoz sitting in the Court and stated that he had
come to his shop. He further stated that the said person had given
three bananas to the boy and asked him to go home and had taken the
four years old girl with him, and then had gone towards the crossing.
On the next day he came to know that a person named Firoz working in
the power plant had committed rape on the girl and had killed her, and
that he was the same person who had bought bananas from his shop.
In the cross-examination, he had stated that after some days of the
incident, the Tahsildar had asked him to come to a school, where he
had identified the accused Firoz.
17. PW 5 Shyam Yadav who happens to be the brother of
Ramkumari and maternal uncle of the victim, had stated that he was
not staying with his mother and sister, however, on the day, when the
victim was found missing, he had stayed back with them. On the next
day morning, the Village Kotwar Santosh
Das had come and informed him that a girl was lying in the field of
Badri Yadav. He therefore went to the field along with the Kotwar and
saw that the girl Pooja was lying unconscious and blood was oozing
from her nostrils. He also saw her underwear, skins of bananas and
some money lying near her body. He took Pooja first to Police Station
Ghansaur and from there took her to Ghansaur Hospital for treatment.
According to him, since her condition was very critical, she was taken to
the hospital at Jabalpur and thereafter to the hospital at Nagpur for
treatment, however, she died there.
18. In the second set of witnesses, the prosecution had examined
the doctors who had treated the victim. PW 17 Dr Bharti Sonkeshariya,
the Medical Officer at the Community Health Centre, Ghansaur had
examined the victim at about 7.30 a.m on 18-4-2013. She had stated
that the patient was unconscious, and blood was oozing from her nose
and also from her vagina. As her condition was very critical, she was
referred to Medical College, Jabalpur. Her medical report was marked as
Ext. P-36. PW 20 Dr Bharti Sahu, Assistant Professor at Medical College,
Jabalpur had stated that on 18-4-2013 at about 9.30 a.m. one girl
named Pooja was brought for treatment by Police Constable Dilip
Rajput of Police Station, Ghansaur and she had found that Pooja was
unconscious and was having seizures. After referring to the injuries, she
had opined in the medical report (Ext. P-40) that the victim's hymen
was found ruptured due to sexual intercourse and that a rape was
committed on her. PW 21 Dr Hemant, a private medical practitioner
(Paediatrician) at Jabalpur Hospital, Jabalpur had also examined Pooja
and carried out CT scan. He had found swelling in her brain. She was
kept on the ventilator, but her condition was very critical and,
therefore, she was shifted to Nagpur.
19. PW 29 Dr Deepak Ramratan Goyal, Paediatric Surgeon at Care
Hospital, Nagpur had deposed that on 20-4-2013 at about 11.00 p.m.
Kumari Pooja Yadav was brought to the hospital by air ambulance from
Jabalpur Research Centre. The girl was unconscious and was kept on
artificial respiration. She was immediately admitted in the intensive
care unit of children. He had found swelling in her brain due to
deficiency of oxygen, and several injuries on her vaginal area.
According to him, in spite of all the efforts, the girl could not be saved
and she died on 29-4-2013 at about 7.45 p.m. In his opinion, the
cause of death was "hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy with vaginal
injury with cardiorespiratory arrest" i.e. she died due to
cardiorespiratory arrest due to deficiency of oxygen in the brain, due to
pressing of mouth and neck and due to excessive injury in the genital
organ. The medical report given by him was marked as Ext. P-50.
20. The post-mortem of the victim was conducted by PW 24 Dr
Pradeep Gangadhar Dixit, Professor and HOD in Forensic Medicine
Department, Medical College, Nagpur, on 30-4-2013, along with his
colleagues. He had recorded the following in the post-mortem note
(Ext. P-44):
"1. The dead was wearing a shirt and pajama of the hospital.
There were 8 teeth in upper portion and 10 temporary teeth on the
lower portion of mouth. Right upper incisor tooth and left upper
lateral incisor tooth were absent. Left upper central incisor tooth was
loose with blue coloured swollen gums of its surroundings.
2. On examination of the external genitals, I had found that labia
majora and labia minora contused, oedematous with blue
discolouration. Superficial partially healed vulva laceration present at
6 "o" clock position of size 0.3 cm X 0.3 cm. Vaginal canal
oedematous and hyperaemic. Hymen torn at 3.6 and 7 o'clock
position. Dilatation of hymenal opening. Urethral meatus
oedematous and bruised present.
3. The following injuries were found on the body of deceased:
(i) Partially healed lacerated wound present over upper lip in
midline involving mucosal area of size 0.2 cm X 0.2 cm muscle-
deep surrounding area contused, bluish.
(ii) Partially healed lacerated wound present over lower lip in
midline involving mucosal area of size 0.2 X 0.2 cm muscle-deep
surrounding area contused, bluish.
(iii) Abrasion present over lateral aspect of neck on right side,
3 cm below tip of right mastoid bone of size 2 cm X 2 cm dark
brown.
(iv) Abrasion present 2 cm below of Injury 3 of size 2 cm X 0.3
cm.
(v) Abrasion present over area overlying right submandibular
region of size 0.3 cm X 0.3 cm.
(vi) Abrasion present over nape of neck on right side at the
level of C-7 vertebra of size 0.4 cm X 0.4 cm.
(vii) Abrasion present over right intra-scapular region of size
0.2 cm X 0.2 cm.
(viii) Abrasion present over left scapular region of size 1.5 cm
0.5 cm.
(ix) Multiple abrasions present over lower portion of stomach at
right side of size varying from 0.3 cm X 0.2 cm to 0.2 cm X 0.1
cm.
(x) Multiple linear abrasions present over posterior aspect of
left thigh, middle 1/3rd part over an area of size 4 cm X 3 cm of
size varying from 4 cm X 0.2 cm to 3 cm X 0.1 cm.
(xi) Tracheotomy wound present over anterior aspect of neck
with stiches in situ which is done for ventilator.
(xii) A hole over right side of next which is made to assess the
central venous pressure.
(xiii) Puncture marks present over both elbow of hands, upper
portion of right wrist, dorsum of right hand and both legs for
administering I.V. fluids.
4. On conducting internal examination of the body, I had found
the following:
(i) Symptoms of pneumonia were found in her right lung. Blood
clotted over internal muscles of the neck. All the organs were
found congested. Brain was found oedematous."
21. The said doctor had deposed that all the injuries found on the
body were ante-mortem and the opinion regarding the cause of death
was kept reserved. Thereafter, on 15-5-2013, the histopathology report
(Ext. P-46) was received
from the Pathology Department, Medical College, Nagpur, in which the
final cause of death reported was "bronchopneumonia and cerebral
hypoxia, which was caused by smothering the nose and mouth".
22. The accused Firoz was medically examined by PW 18 Dr
Dipendra Sallame, the Medical Officer at CHC Lakhnadon, District Seoni
on 25-4-2021 and after his examination, he had opined that the
accused Firoz was capable to do sexual intercourse. Doctor had
prepared and sealed two semen slides of the semen of Mohd. Firoz and
had also sealed a black coloured underwear of the said Firoz encircling a
white spot, and had handed over the same to the said constable. His
examination report was exhibited as Ext. P-39. PW 23 Dr Vinod
Dahayat, the Medical Officer at District Hospital, Seoni to whom the
accused Firoz was brought on 4-5-2013, had taken his blood sample for
the DNA test. He had also attested the photograph of accused Firoz.
The said doctor had identified the accused Firoz sitting in the court by
stating that he was the same person whose blood sample was taken
and whose photograph was attested by him.
23. PW 25 Dr Pankaj Shrivastava, Scientific Officer at FSL, Sagar had
received the articles relating to the present case through the letter
dated 21-4-2013 of the Superintendent of Police, Seoni brought by the
constable, Police Station Ghansaur on 24-4-2013, and through the
letter dated 4-5-2013 of Superintendent of Police Station, Seoni
brought by the constable, Police Station Ghansaur on 6-5-2013 for
conducting the DNA test. He had stated that at the time of
examination, all the articles were found in sealed condition and the
seals were found intact. He had also stated about the method used by
him to obtain the DNA from the received articles and also about the
opinion (Ext. P-47) given by him on the basis of DNA examination. He
had opined as under:
"(i) Identical female DNA profile was obtained from the source
frock and vaginal smear slide of Pooja Yadav (Article "A"), frock and
swab (Article "F") and blood sample (Article "G").
(ii) The DNA profile obtained from the hair (Article "B") found
from the place of incident and DNA profile obtained from the source
blood sample (Article "I") of the accused Firoz is identical, which
confirms this fact that these hair strands are of the accused Firoz."
24. The last set of witnesses examined by the prosecution comprised
of the police witnesses, panch witnesses and the Tahsildar who had
conducted the TI parade. PW 13 Mohammad Sultan was the Assistant
Sub-Inspector at Police Station, Ghansaur. He along with the DSP R.N.
Parteti had found the hair strands and skins of bananas in the field and
had sealed them as per the seizure memo (Ext. P-10) dated 20-4-
2013. He had also stated that on 21-4-2013, he had received from
Constable Dilip, a sealed yellow envelope containing a frock and vaginal
slides of the deceased in presence of the witnesses and had prepared
the seizure memo (Ext. P-29). PW 15 Head Constable Niyaz Ahmad at
Police Station Ghansaur had registered the missing person report at
Sanha No. 747 as stated by Smt Ramkumari Yadav on 17-4-2013 at
20 : 35.
25. PW 30 S. Ram Maravi, the Sub-Inspector, In-charge Police
Station at Police Station Kindrai, District Seoni (M.P.) was part of the
team constituted by the Superintendent of Police, Seoni for search and
arrest of the accused Firoz. According to this witness, he along with
others had gone to Bhagalpur, Bihar and after collecting the call details
of the accused, his location was found out with the cooperation of the
local police of Bhagalpur. The accused Firoz was arrested from a place
near a mosque situated near the house of his aunt on 23-4-2013, and
was brought back after obtaining the transit remand from the court
concerned at Bhagalpur as per the order at Ext. P-50.
26. PW 33 In-charge Police Station, Ghansaur Mr R.D. Barthi had
conducted the investigation of Missing Person Case No. 10/13, and
during the course of investigation, it was found that the alleged
offences were committed by the accused Firoz. He therefore had
registered Crime No. 68/13 for the offence under Sections 363, 366 IPC
(Ext. P-60) against the accused. He had stated about the investigation
carried out by him and about the arrest of the accused Rakesh
Choudhary. DSP Mr R.N. Parteti who had carried out the further
investigation was examined as PW 34. He had deposed about the
details of investigation carried out by him till the charge-sheet was filed
in the case. PW 16 Tahsildar at Seoni Mr Sudhir Jain had conducted the
identification parade of the accused Mohd. Firoz. According to him, the
witnesses Smt Ramkumari, Preeti Yadav, Nitin Namdev and Himmabai
had identified the accused during the course of the TI parade.
27. Significantly the accused Firoz in his further statement recorded
under Section 313 CrPC had admitted about his visit to the house of
the victim along with the other accused Rakesh Choudhary for making
an inquiry about Shyam. The accused had also admitted having told the
mother of Shyam that he (accused) had come from Gorakhpur and was
staying in the house of Dassi Yadav. The accused also admitted about
his arrest as per the arrest memo, Ext. P-54 and about he having been
brought to Ghansaur after obtaining the transit remand from the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Bhagalpur.
28. The other accused Rakesh Choudhary, (who has been acquitted
by the High Court), in his further statement had admitted to the extent
that he had gone along with the accused Firoz to the house of
Ramkumari, however, according to him after showing the house to the
accused Firoz, he had left the house. He in support of his defence had
examined two witnesses i.e. DW 1 Virendra Choudhary who was
residing adjacent to his house and DW 2 Gopal Prasad Ahirwar who had
a footwear shop situated adjacent to the footwear shop of Virendra
Choudhary. The Court is not required to deal in detail with the said
evidence adduced on behalf of the accused Rakesh, as he has already
been acquitted by the High Court. His acquittal having not been
challenged by the prosecution before this Court, the same has attained
finality.
Submissions
29. The learned Senior Counsel Mr B.H. Marlapalle, appearing for the
appellant-accused appointed through the Supreme Court Legal Services
Committee, while fairly not disputing the visit of the appellant-accused
at the
The surest way't to legal research!
house of the victim on the date and time as per the case of the
prosecution and also not disputing the medical reports of the victim,
tried to highlight certain discrepancies appearing in the evidence of the
witnesses examined by the prosecution. Placing reliance upon the
decision of this Court in Masalti V. State of U.P.³ he submitted that
while appreciating the evidence of the partisan and interested
witnesses, the Court should be very careful in weighing such evidence.
30. The learned Senior Counsel also relied upon various decisions of
this Court to substantiate his submission that the case of the
prosecution being dependent on the circumstantial evidence alone, the
entire chain was required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt by
leading cogent evidence, which the prosecution had failed to prove. The
trial court had also failed to bring to the knowledge of the accused the
clear questions with regard to the incriminating evidence against the
accused. The "last seen theory" as propounded by the prosecution was
also not proved which could connect the accused with alleged crime.
Merely because the accused had admitted his visit at the place of the
victim, no inference could be drawn against the accused that he had
committed the alleged crime of rape and murder.
31. Invoking the provisions of Section 313 CrPC the learned Senior
Counsel submitted that the said provisions must be observed faithfully
and fairly. The attention of the accused should be drawn to the specific
points in the charge and in the evidence on which the prosecution
claims that the case is made out against him so that he may be able to
give such explanation as he may desire to give. In this regard, Mr B.H.
Marlapalle has placed reliance on the observations made by this Court
in Ajay Singh V. State of Maharashtra4
32. Mr Marlapalle also submitted that there was a great media
pressure on the investigating agency when the incident occurred and,
therefore, the investigating officer without carrying out an in-depth
investigation hurriedly submitted the charge-sheet against the accused.
Since no advocate was ready to appear for the accused, the trial court
had appointed a common advocate for both the accused from the legal
service committee, however no fair trial was conducted. The purpose of
the criminal trial is to conduct fair and impartial trial without being
influenced by extraneous consideration. In this regard, he has placed
reliance on the decisions of this Court in K. Anbazhagan V. Supt. of
Police5 and in Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) V. State of Gujarat6.
33. Per contra, the learned advocate Mr P.V. Yogeswaran, appearing
for the respondent State vehemently submitted that this was one of the
heinous and despicable crimes committed by the appellant-accused.
The trial court and the High Court having relied upon the cogent
evidence adduced by the prosecution and convicted the appellant, this
Court may not re-appreciate the evidence which has already been
properly appreciated by the said two courts.
According to him, the appellant-accused by admitting his visit at the
house of the victim along with Rakesh Chaudhary, admitting his arrest
as per the case of the prosecution and by not disputing the medical
reports of the victim had relieved, half of the burden of the prosecution
to prove the allegations against him. He further submitted that every
minor contradiction or discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses
cannot be termed as major contradictions requiring the court to throw
the evidence of prosecution overboard. It was duly proved that the
victim was lastly seen in the company of the accused and it was within
special knowledge of the accused as to what happened to the victim
after he took her with him from the shop of fruit vendor. The time gap
between the victim being last seen with the accused and the time when
she was found unconscious in the field was so proximate an inference
was required to be drawn that it was the accused alone who had
committed the alleged crime. Lastly, he submitted that the grievance of
mistrial or trial having not been conducted in a fair manner, was not
taken by the appellant-accused either during the course of the trial
before the trial court or even before the appellate stage, and the same
is sought to be raised for the first time before this Court which should
not be entertained.
Analysis and findings
34. It is true that the entire case of the prosecution rested on the
circumstantial evidence, inasmuch as though certain facts were
admitted by the appellant-accused in his further statement under
Section 313 CrPC, like his visit to the house of the victim on the
previous evening of the alleged incident, and he having been arrested
and brought back from Bhagalpur, Bihar, as per the transit remand
granted by the court concerned, there was no eyewitness to the alleged
incident.
35. The law with regard to the appreciation of evidence when the
case of the prosecution hinges on the circumstantial evidence is very
well settled. The five golden principles laid down by this Court in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda V. State of Maharashtra and followed in
"153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the
following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an
accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to
be drawn should be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned
"must or should" and not "may be" established. There is not only a grammatical but
a legal distinction between "may be proved" and "must be or should be proved" as
was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade V. State of Maharashtra8
19.
Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must
be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and
the mental distance between "may be" and "must be" is long and
divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions.
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should
not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the
one to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with
the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human
probability the act must have been done by the accused.' "
36. Keeping in mind the above set of principles, let us examine
whether the prosecution had proved beyond reasonable doubt, the
entire chain of circumstances, not leaving any link missing for the
accused to escape from the clutches of law. The first and foremost
circumstance regarding the visit of the present appellant along with
Rakesh Chaudhary on the date and time as alleged was very crucial and
that was admitted by the appellant. By such admission, even his
identity had stood proved. There cannot be gainsaying that no
conviction could be based on the statement of the accused recorded
under Section 313 CrPC and the prosecution has to prove the guilt of
the accused by leading independent and cogent evidence, nonetheless
it is equally settled proposition of law that when the accused makes
inculpatory and exculpatory statements, the inculpatory part of the
statement can be taken aid of to lend credence to the case of
prosecution.
37. This Court while dealing with the issue of inculpatory and
exculpatory statements of the accused made under Section 313 CrPC
pp. 244-45, paras 27 & 30)
"27. The statement made in defence by the accused under
Section 313 CrPC can certainly be taken aid of to lend credence to
the evidence led by the prosecution, but only a part of such
statement under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
cannot be made the sole basis of his conviction. The law on the
subject is almost settled that statement under Section 313 CrPC of
the accused can either be relied in whole or in part. It may also be
possible to rely on the inculpatory part of his statement if the
exculpatory part is found to be false on the basis of the evidence led
357-58, para 23)
`23. In this case the exculpatory part of the statement in Ext. 6
is not only inherently improbable but is contradicted by the other
evidence. According to this statement, the injury which the appellant
received was caused by the appellant's attempt to catch hold of the
hand of Lal Mohan Sharma to prevent the attack on the victim. This was
contradicted by the statement of the accused himself under Section
342 CrPC to the effect that he had received the injury in a scuffle with a
herdsman. The injury found on his body when he was examined by the
doctor on 13-10-1961 negatives both these versions. Neither of these
versions accounts for the profuse bleeding which led to his washing his
clothes and having a bath in River Patro, the amount of bleeding and
the washing of the bloodstains being so considerable as to attract the
attention of Ram Kishore Pandey, PW 17 and asking him about the
cause thereof. The bleeding was not a simple one as his clothes all got
stained with blood as also his books, his exercise book and his belt and
shoes. More than that the knife which was discovered on his person was
found to have been stained with blood according to the report of the
Chemical Examiner. According to the post-mortem report this knife
could have been the cause of the injuries on the victim. In
circumstances like these there being enough evidence to reject the
exculpatory part of the statement of the appellant in Ext. 6 the High
Court had acted rightly in accepting the inculpatory part and piercing
the same with the other evidence to come to the conclusion that the
appellant was the person responsible for the crime.'
*
*
*
30. The statement of the accused under Section 313 CrPC is not a
substantive piece of evidence. It can be used for appreciating
evidence led by the prosecution to accept or reject it. It is, however,
not a substitute for the evidence of the prosecution. As held in Nishi
Kant1 by this Court, if the exculpatory part of his statement is found
10
to be false and the evidence led by the prosecution is reliable, the
inculpatory part of his statement can be taken aid of to lend
assurance to the evidence of the prosecution. If the prosecution
evidence does not inspire confidence to sustain the conviction of the
accused, the inculpatory part of his statement under Section 313
CrPC cannot be made the sole basis of his conviction."
38. In the instant case also, though the conviction of the appellant-
accused could not be made merely on his admission of the
circumstance of his visit to the house of the informant on the previous
day evening of the fateful day, such admission could certainly be taken
aid of to lend assurance to the evidence of the prosecution.
39. The next and most important circumstance was with regard to
the theory of "last seen together" propounded by the prosecution. In
this regard, if the version of the witnesses examined by the
prosecution, more particularly of PW 1 Ramkumari i.e. the mother of
the victim, PW 6 Himmabai i.e. the grandmother of the victim, PW 7
Preeti Yadav i.e. the aunt of the victim and
PW 31 Ram Kishan are closely appreciated, there remains no shadow of
doubt that it was duly proved that after Himmabai refused Rakesh
Chaudhary to permit the appellant-accused to stay at their house,
Rakesh Chaudhary had left the house, but the appellant continued to
sit in the courtyard of the house of the informant Ramkumari. It was
also proved that at that time the victim along with her cousins was
playing in the said courtyard, and after some time the appellant-
accused, victim and Ram Kishan were not seen at the courtyard.
According to Ramkumari, the mother of the victim, when she was
searching for her daughter, she saw that Ram Kishan was coming with
a polythene bag containing bananas, and Ram Kishan told her that the
said bananas were given by Bhaijaan i.e. the appellant, and that he
(i.e. Bhaijaan) had taken the victim along with him. The said Ram
Kishan examined as PW 31, though a young boy, had fully corroborated
the said version of Ram Kumari, in his deposition before the Court. The
fruit vendor, Nitin Namdev (PW 4), had also stated that the appellant
along with two children had come to his shop to purchase the bananas
and that he had given three bananas to Ram Kishan and asked him to
leave home, and he had taken the victim with him.
40. The evidence of these witnesses could not be disbelieved merely
because they happened to be the relatives of the informant, as sought
to be submitted by the learned Senior Advocate Mr Marlapalle for the
appellant. Pertinently there was no concrete defence taken during the
cross-examination of any of these witnesses examined by the
prosecution. Some minor discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses
could not be said to be major contradictions to throw away the case of
the prosecution overboard or disbelieve the prosecution. Nothing more
could be expected from Ram Kishan who was aged about four years
than what he had stated in his deposition, more particularly, when his
testimony was found to be truthful and when the identity of the
accused was not in dispute. Hence, it was also duly proved that the
appellant-accused had taken the victim with him from the shop of fruit
vendor Nitin Namdev in the evening hours of the alleged incident,
which was a very strong circumstance proved against the accused.
41. Once the theory of "last seen together" was established, the
accused was expected to offer some explanation as to under which
circumstances, he had parted the company of the victim. It hardly
needs to be reiterated that in the criminal jurisprudence, the entire
burden of proving the guilt of the accused rests on the prosecution,
nonetheless if the accused does not throw any light upon the facts
which are proved to be within his special knowledge in view of Section
106 of the Evidence Act, such failure on the part of the accused may
also provide an additional link in the chain of circumstances required to
be proved against him. Of course, Section 106 of the Evidence Act does
not shift the burden of the prosecution on the accused, nor requires the
accused to furnish an explanation with regard to the facts which are
especially within his knowledge, nonetheless furnishing or non-
furnishing of the explanation by the accused would be a very crucial
fact, when the theory of "last seen together" as propounded by the
prosecution is proved against him, to know as to how and when the
accused parted the company of the victim.
42. In Rajender V. State (NCT of Delhi)¹1, this Court has succinctly
dealt with the doctrine of "last seen together" in the light of Section
106 of the Evidence Act. The relevant observations read as under :
"12.2.4. Having observed so, it is crucial to note that the
reasonableness of the explanation offered by the accused as to how
and when he/she parted company with the deceased has a bearing
on the effect of the last seen in a case. Section 106 of the Evidence
Act, 1872 provides that the burden of proof for any fact that is
especially within the knowledge of a person lies upon such person.
Thus, if a person is last seen with the deceased, he must offer an
explanation as to how and when he parted company with the
deceased. In other words, he must furnish an explanation that
appears to the court to be probable and satisfactory, and if he fails to
offer such an explanation on the basis of facts within his special
knowledge, the burden cast upon him under Section 106 is not
discharged. Particularly in cases resting on circumstantial evidence,
if the accused fails to offer a reasonable explanation in discharge of
the burden placed on him, such failure by itself can provide an
additional link in the chain of circumstances proved against him.
This, however, does not mean that Section 106 shifts the burden of
proof of a criminal trial on the accused. Such burden always rests on
the prosecution. Section 106 only lays down the rule that when the
accused does not throw any light upon facts which are specially
within his/her knowledge and which cannot support any theory or
hypothesis compatible with his innocence, the court can consider his
failure to adduce an explanation as an additional link which
completes the chain of incriminating circumstances."
(emphasis in original)
612-13, para 6)
"6. We have considered the respective submissions and the
evidence on record. There is no eyewitness to the occurrence but
only circumstances coupled with the fact of the deceased having
been last seen with the appellant. Criminal jurisprudence and the
plethora of judicial precedents leave little room for reconsideration of
the basic principles for invocation of the last seen theory as a facet of
circumstantial evidence. Succinctly stated, it may be a weak kind of
evidence by itself to found conviction upon the same singularly. But
when it is coupled with other circumstances such as the time when
the deceased was last seen with the accused, and the recovery of the
corpse being in very close proximity of time, the accused owes an
explanation under Section 106 of the Evidence Act with regard to the
circumstances under which death may have taken place. If the
accused offers no explanation, or furnishes a wrong explanation,
absconds, motive is established, and there is corroborative evidence
available inter alia in the form of recovery or otherwise forming a
chain of circumstances leading to the only inference for guilt of the
accused, incompatible with any possible
hypothesis of innocence, conviction can be based on the same. If there
be any doubt or break in the link of chain of circumstances, the benefit
of doubt must go to the accused. Each case will therefore have to be
examined on its own facts for invocation of the doctrine."
44. Following the above ratio, in Surajdeo Mahto V. State of Bihar13,
"30. The case of the prosecution in the present case heavily banks
upon the principle of "last seen theory". Briefly put, the last seen
theory is applied where the time interval between the point of when
the accused and the deceased were last seen together, and when the
victim is found dead, is so small that the possibility of any other
person other than the accused being the perpetrator of crime
becomes impossible. Elaborating on the principle of "last seen alive",
a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Satpal V. State of Haryana-12,
has, however, cautioned that unless the fact of last seen is
corroborated by some other evidence, the fact that the deceased was
last seen in the vicinity of the accused, would by itself, only be a
para 6)
'6.
Succinctly stated, it may be a weak kind of evidence by
itself to found conviction upon the same singularly. But when it is
coupled with other circumstances such as the time when the
deceased was last seen with the accused, and the recovery of the
corpse being in very close proximity of time, the accused owes an
explanation under Section 106 of the Evidence Act with regard to
the circumstances under which death may have taken place. If
the accused offers no explanation, or furnishes a wrong
explanation, absconds, motive is established, and there is
corroborative evidence available inter alia in the form of recovery
or otherwise forming a chain of circumstances leading to the only
inference for guilt of the accused, incompatible with any possible
hypothesis of innocence, conviction can be based on the same. If
there be any doubt or break in the link of chain of circumstances,
the benefit of doubt must go to the accused. Each case will
therefore have to be examined on its own facts for invocation of
the doctrine."
31. We may hasten to clarify that the fact of last seen should not
be weighed in isolation or be segregated from the other evidence led
by the prosecution. The last seen theory should rather be applied
taking into account the case of the prosecution in its entirety. Hence,
the courts have to not only consider the factum of last seen, but also
have to keep in mind the circumstances that preceded and followed
from the point of the deceased being so last seen in the presence of
the accused."
45. In the instant case, though it was duly proved that the appellant
-accused had taken the victim with him from the shop of fruit vendor,
neither any explanation was offered by the appellant in his further
statement under
Section 313 CrPC nor any concrete defence was taken during the course
of the cross-examination of the witnesses. It is pertinent to note that
after the alleged incident, he had run away to his native place at Bihar.
Admittedly he was arrested therefrom and was brought back after
obtaining the transit remand from the court concerned at Bhagalpur.
The said conduct of the accused in absconding away also was a
circumstance duly proved by the prosecution against him.
46. So far as the proximity of time is concerned, it is required to be
noted that Ramkumari, the mother of the victim, on being informed by
Ram Kishan (PW 31) that Bhaijaan i.e. the appellant had taken the
victim with him, the said Ramkumari along with her mother Himmabai
and others had immediately gone to the police station at Ghansaur to
lodge a missing person report (Ext. P-1). It is true that there was no
direct allegation made by them against the appellant in the said report,
however, at that point of time, the informant was not aware about the
ill-intention of the appellant, and no such crime was reportedly
committed. It was only when the victim, on the next day early
morning, was found in the field of Badri Yadav lying unconscious, the
FIR was registered against him. The victim was also immediately taken
to the hospital at Ghansaur for her treatment, and thereafter, taken to
the hospital at Jabalpur and Nagpur for better treatment as her health
was deteriorating. As per the medical reports, she was raped and the
injuries were found on the private parts of her body. She had remained
unconscious all throughout. She expired on 29-4-2013 and the final
cause of death reported was "bronchopneumonia and cerebral hypoxia
which was caused by smothering the nose and mouth". Thus, the time
gap between the victim being lastly seen with the appellant-accused
and the time when she was found injured and unconscious in the field
was hardly 12 hours. The said injuries had resulted into her death.
47. Thus, coupled with the other evidence, the prosecution had
proved the close proximity of time when the victim was last seen with
the appellant and when the victim was found unconscious and in
injured condition, which ultimately resulted into her death. The DNA
profile obtained from the hair found from the place of incident and the
DNA profile obtained from the source of blood sample of the appellant
was identical, and confirmed that the hair strands were of the appellant
only, as per the opinion at Ext. P-47 given by PW 25 Dr Pankaj
Srivastava, Scientific Officer, FSL, Sagar.
Fair trial
48. Coming to the next issue raised by the learned Senior Advocate
Mr Marlapalle with regard to the trial having not been conducted in fair
manner, it may be noted that the concept of fair trial has been
enshrined not only in Articles 21 and 39-A of the Constitution of India,
but also in Section 304 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Free and fair
trial is sine qua non of Article 21, and after the formative decision in
Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India¹4 it has been made clear that the
procedure in criminal trials must be right, just and fair and not
arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. Article 39-A provides for free legal aid
to the poor and weaker sections of the society and ensures justice for
all. Section 304 CrPC further provides that where in a trial before the
Court
of Session, the accused is not represented by a pleader, and where it
appears to the court that the accused has no sufficient means to
engage a pleader, the court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the
expense of the State. This Court also time and again has emphasised
the right to a fair trial by the courts, in the letter and spirit of the right
to life and personal liberty flowing from the various guarantees
enshrined in the Constitution of India. We may hasten to add at this
stage that right to fair and speedy trial applies as much to the victim as
the accused. Right to get speedy justice applies to the victim as well.
Hence considering the gravity and seriousness of the crime, if the trial
is expedited bv the court. it could not to be said that such trial was not
fair to the accused. Of course, while expediting the trial, it is imperative
on the court to see that the due procedure is followed during the course
of trial.
49. So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, there is
nothing on record to suggest that the due procedure was not followed
or that the appellant-accused had suffered on account of deprivation of
the legal aid or legal assistance to him. The trial court did provide legal
assistance to both the accused by appointing a lawyer at the expense of
the State, who had thoroughly cross-examined all the witnesses
examined by the prosecution, and had also examined two witnesses on
behalf of accused Rakesh Choudhary. Apart from the fact that no such
contention was raised during the course of trial or even before the High
Court in the two separate appeals filed by the accused represented by
two separate lawyers, no such contention has been raised by the
appellant-accused even in the memorandum of the present appeal. The
oral submission made by the learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the accused at the fag end of his arguments that there was no
fair trial conducted, without substantiating the said submission, cannot
be entertained. Even otherwise, it may noted that during the course of
recording the further statement, the appellant-accused had responded
to the incriminating circumstances brought to his notice, after fully
understanding them as transpiring from the answers recorded by the
court. It is possible that the incident in question would have created an
anguish amongst the public at large as also amongst the media,
nonetheless in absence of any material on record, no inference could be
drawn that because of such media pressure, the trial was not conducted
in fair manner.
50. Though, it is true that the "Equality, Justice and Liberty" is the
trinity of fair trial recognised in the administration of justice, it is
equally true that such concept of fair trial entails triangulation of
interest of the accused, the victim and the society at large. In the
overzealous approach to protect the rights of the accused, the rights of
the victim who is the most aggrieved should not be either undermined
or neglected. Similarly, the cases involving heinous crimes, the society
at large would also be an important stakeholder. Interest of the society,
which acts through the State and prosecuting agencies, should also not
be treated with disdain. Therefore, the court conducting the trial/appeal
is not only obliged to protect the rights of the accused but also the
rights of the victim, and the interest of the society at large. The Judge
presiding over the criminal trial has not only to see that innocent man
is not punished but has also to see that guilty man does not escape.
Both are his public duties required to be discharged very diligently to
maintain the public confidence and uphold the majesty of the law.
Conclusion
51. Having regard to the proved circumstances on record, more
particularly the circumstances that preceded and followed from the
point the deceased victim was seen last together with the appellant-
accused, the Court has no hesitation in holding that the prosecution
had proved beyond reasonable doubt all the circumstances individually
and also proved the circumstances forming a chain, so conclusive as to
rule out the possibility of any other hypothesis except the guilt of the
appellant-accused. It was duly proved that while committing the
barbaric acts of rape and sexual assault on the young child-victim aged
about 04 years, the appellant-accused had inflicted bodily injuries as
mentioned in the post-mortem report which had caused her death. The
Court, therefore, holds that the trial court had rightly convicted the
appellant-accused for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 376
76(2)(m), 363, 366 IPC and Section 5(i) read with Section 6
and Section 5(m) read with Section 6 of the Pocso Act. The said order
of conviction was affirmed by the High Court; and is being further
affirmed by this Court.
52. The next question that falls for consideration is with regard to
the sentence to be imposed on the appellant.
53. The trial court while imposing various sentences for the other
offences, had imposed the death penalty for the offence under Section
302 IPC, which has been confirmed by the High Court in the impugned
judgment1. It may be noted that since the death of the victim was
caused due to the injuries inflicted by the appellant while committing
offence under Sections 376(2)(i) and 376(2)(m), the provisions of
Section 376-A IPC would also get attracted which had come into force
w.e.f. 3-2-2013 i.e. prior to the alleged incident in question, and which
provided for wide range of punishments up to death penalty. The High
Court in the impugned order, though made observation in this regard,
did not consider it on the ground that the charge under Section 376-A
IPC was not framed by the Sessions Court against the accused.
54. However, it may be noted that in view of Section 215 CrPC an
omission to state the offence or its particulars in the charge could not
be regarded as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such
error or omission, and it had occasioned a failure of justice. In the
instant case, the accused was already charged for the offence under
Section 302 which is punishable with death or life imprisonment, and
was also charged for the offences under Sections 376(2)(i) and 376(2)
(m), as covered in Section 376-A IPC, which is also punishable up to
death sentence amongst other lesser punishments. Hence, non-
mentioning of Section 376-A in the charge could not be said to have
misled the accused, nor any failure of justice could be said to have
occasioned.
55. It may be pertinent to note that this Court in terms of the law
laid down by the Constitution Bench in Bachan Singh V. State of
Punjab- 15 and in tune with the directions issued in the other similar
matters, touching upon the issues concerning the mitigating factors,
had vide the order dated 25-11-2021 directed the State authorities
to produce on record the report of the probationer
officer, if any and had directed the Director General (Prison) of the
State to place on record the reports from the jails/prisons concerned
where the appellant was or is presently lodged, about his conduct and
nature of work done by him while in the jail. The Court had also called
for the psychiatric and psychological evolution reports of the appellant.
The said authorities have submitted their respective reports before the
Court.
56. The learned Senior Advocate Mr Marlapalle relying upon the
various decisions of this Court would submit that in similar cases as the
present one, this Court, considering the mitigating circumstances has
commuted the sentence of death penalty to the life imprisonment. The
case on hand could not be said to be the "the rarest of the rare case",
where the question of awarding lesser punishment than the death
penalty is totally foreclosed. He implored the Court to consider before
imposing the sentence upon the appellant, the documents produced on
record after the completion of the arguments, like the affidavits of the
family members, the jail documents and the social inquiry report of the
appellant.
57. As demonstrated earlier, once again one of the most barbaric
and ugly human faces has surfaced. A tiny bud like girl was smothered
by the appellant before she could blossom in this world. The monstrous
acts of the appellant suffocated the victim to such an extent that she
had no option but to leave this world. Once again, all the constitutional
guarantees have failed to protect the victim from the clutches of the
demonising acts of the appellant. In the opinion of the Court, any
sympathy shown to the appellant would lead to miscarriage of justice.
However, it has been brought to the notice of this Court that in series of
judgments, this Court has not treated such case as the rarest of the
rare case.
58. In Bachan Singh V. State of Punjab15, the Constitution Bench
while upholding the constitutional validity of the death sentence held
inter alia that the imposition of death penalty is required to be guided
by the paramount beacons of the legislative policy discernible from
Sections 354(3) and 235(2) CrPC, namely : (i) the extreme penalty can
be inflicted only in the gravest cases of extreme culpability; and (ii) in
making the choice of the sentence. In addition to the circumstances of
the offence, due regard must be paid to the circumstances of the
offender also. In Machhi Singh V. State of Punjab17, a three-Judge
Bench of this Court, after noting the principles laid down in Bachan
Singh case15 regarding the formula of "the rarest of the rare cases" for
imposing the death sentence, observed that the guidelines indicated in
Bachan Singh case15 will have to be culled out and applied to the facts
of each individual case where the question of imposing death sentence
arises.
59. In the recent case of Shatrughna Baban Meshram V. State of
Maharashtra¹8 this Court considering catena of earlier decisions in the
light of Section 302 read with Section 376-A IPC observed that as
against Section 302 IPC, while dealing with the cases under Section
376-A IPC, a wider spectrum is available for consideration by the courts
as to the punishment to be awarded. In the said case, this Court
negatived the submission made on behalf of the
appellant-accused that in the case based on circumstantial evidence,
the death sentence should be commuted to life imprisonment.
However, considering the facts that the accused had not consciously
caused any injury with an intent to extinguish the life of the victim, and
that the offence in that case was under clause Fourthly of Section 300
IPC, this Court had commuted the sentence of death penalty to life
imprisonment. The facts and circumstances of the case on hand are
similar to the case of Shatrughna Baban Meshram 18 with one distinction
in that, Section 376-A IPC being applicable in the instant case.
60. Considering the above, we, while affirming the view taken by the
courts below with regard to the conviction of the appellant for the
offences charged against him, deem it proper to commute, and
accordingly commute the sentence of death for the sentence of
imprisonment for life, for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.
Since, Section 376-A IPC is also applicable to the facts of the case,
considering the gravity and seriousness of the offence, the sentence of
imprisonment for the remainder of the appellant's natural life would
have been an appropriate sentence, however, we are reminded of what
Oscar Wilde has said - "The only difference between the saint and the
sinner is that every saint has a past and every sinner has a future".
61. One of the basic principles of restorative justice as developed by
this Court over the years, also is to give an opportunity to the offender
to repair the damage caused, and to become a socially useful
individual, when he is released from the jail. The maximum punishment
prescribed may not always be the determinative factor for repairing the
crippled psyche of the offender. Hence, while balancing the scales of
retributive justice and restorative justice, we deem it appropriate to
impose upon the appellant-accused the sentence of imprisonment for a
period of twenty years instead of imprisonment for the remainder of his
natural life for the offence under Section 376-A IPC. The conviction and
sentence recorded by the courts below for the other offences under IPC
and the POCSO Act are affirmed. It is needless to say that all the
punishments imposed shall run concurrently.
62. Before concluding, we would like to place on record our gratitude
and appreciation for the invaluable assistance provided and services
rendered by the learned Senior Advocate Mr Marlapalle, appearing for
the appellant-accused, appointed through the Supreme Court Legal
Services Committee.
The appeal stands allowed to the aforesaid extent.
+
(Madhya Pradesh High Court, Criminal Reference No. 9 of 2013, dt. 15-7-2014) [Partly
allowed]
1
3
Masalti V. State of U.P., AIR 1965 SC 202
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
14
15
(Cri) 555