In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE B.R. GAVAI AND P.S. NARASIMHA, JJ.)
VIJAY RAJMOHAN
Appellant;
Versus
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (ANTI-
CORRUPTION BRANCH)
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No.
of 2022 , decided on October 11, 2022
A. Public Accountability, Vigilance and Prevention of Corruption -
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 - S. 19 - Sanction for prosecution -
Opinion of CVC on whether sanction should be granted - Nature of - Held,
though opinion of CVC is only advisory, it is nevertheless a valuable input in
the decision-making process of the appointing authority - However, the
final decision of the appointing authority must be of its own, by application
of independent mind
- Held, five legislations on the subject of corruption being CrPC, the
DSPE Act, the PC Act, the CVC Act, and the Lokpal Act operate as integrated
scheme and as per this statutory scheme, the appointing authority could call
for, seek and consider the advice of CVC and, thus, by doing so, it can
neither be termed as acting under dictation nor a factor which could be
referred to as an irrelevant consideration
- Sanction for prosecution in present case - Whether suffered from
illegality due to non-application of mind on part of the appointing authority
DoPT and acting under dictation of the CVC
- About two months after receiving the proposal for sanction, the DoPT
examined the facts of the case and sought certain clarifications from the CBI - A
month after that the CBI gave clarifications on the same questions Upon
reviewing the clarifications, the DoPT believed that there were many errors in the
investigation conducted by CBI, and therefore sought the opinion of the CVC
- CVC followed it up and sought clarification from CBI and after examining the
clarifications tendered by CBI, CVC believed this to be a strong case for grant of
sanction subject to CBI conducting a re-investigation on certain aspects of the case
- This opinion communicated to the DoPT and it being unclear, the DoPT sought to
know whether CVC recommended the grant of sanction or whether CVC advised
CBI to re-investigate
- A month later, the CVC clarified to the DoPT that CBI should re-investigate
the matter and come up with its revised findings - Accordingly, the DoPT informed
CVC that it will treat the proposal for sanction for prosecution of the appellant as
closed until the re-investigation is completed and a new proposal is received from
CBI - By this time, thirteen months had passed since the request for sanction was
made
- Meanwhile, the CBI submitted a revised explanation to the seven questions
posed by CVC and, satisfied with the same, CVC advised DoPT to grant sanction -
Responding to the proposal, DoPT, by its letter dt. 16-12-2016, sought to know if
CBI had completed the re-investigation, to which CVC responded on 9-2-2017,
stating that it was satisfied with the proposal of CBI - Finally, on 24-7-2017, DoPT
granted sanction for prosecution
- Contention raised that the sanction for prosecution was hit by non-application
of mind as DoPT acted on dictation by CVC, and for this purpose, the said sanction
order must be set aside - Tenability of
- Sanction order of the appointing authority-DoPT in present case, held, is
independent decision of the department and appears to be based on the material
before it - Resultantly, the order of sanction, held, does not suffer from illegality
due to non-application of mind or acting under dictation of the CVC
- Penal Code, 1860 - S. 109 - Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 - Ss.
8(1)(c), 8(1)(e), 8(1)(f), 8(1)(g) r/w Ss. 8-A and 8-B - Police - Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (Central Act 25 of 1946) - S. 4(1) - Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973, S. 197
B. Public Accountability, Vigilance and Prevention of Corruption -
Corruption/Abuse of Power - Generally - Held, five legislations on the
subject of corruption being CrPC, the DSPE Act, the PC Act, the CVC Act, and
the Lokpal Act, the same operate as integrated scheme
Held :
The five legislations being the CrPC, the DSPE Act, the PC Act, the CVC Act, and
the Lokpal Act, must be read together to enable the authorities to subserve the
common purpose and objectives underlying these legislations. The Central Vigilance
Commission, constituted under the CVC Act is specifically entrusted with the duty
and function of providing expert advice on the subject. It may be necessary for the
appointing authority to call for and seek the opinion of CVC before it takes any
decision on the request for sanction for prosecution. The statutory scheme under
which the appointing authority could call for, seek and consider the advice of CVC
can neither be termed as acting under dictation nor a factor which could be referred
to as an irrelevant consideration. The opinion of CVC is only advisory. It is
nevertheless a valuable input in the decision-making process of the appointing
authority. The final decision of the appointing authority must be of its own by
application of independent mind. The issue is, therefore, answered by holding that
there is no illegality in the action of the appointing authority, the DoPT, if it calls for,
refers, and considers the opinion of the Central
Vigilance Commission before it takes its final decision on the request for sanction
for prosecuting a public servant.
(Para 19)
Returning to the case facts, the Supreme Court has examined the
correspondence and the long-drawn communications between CBI, the DoPT, and
CVC. It is found that the inquiry made by the appointing authority, the DoPT, was
only for soliciting further information, and particularly the opinion given by CVC is
also advisory. The sanction order of the DoPT dated 24-7-2017 is an independent
decision of the department that was taken based on the material before it. Under
these circumstances, the Supreme Court is not inclined to accept the first
submission made on behalf of the appellant that the order of sanction suffers from
illegality due to non-application of mind or acting under dictation.
(Para 20)
relied on
to
C. Public Accountability, Vigilance and Prevention of Corruption -
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 - S. 19(1) and provisos thereto -
Sanction for prosecution - Periods specified in provisos to S. 19(1) within
which issue of grant of sanction must be determined - Whether mandatory
- Consequences of non-compliance therewith - Explained
- Delay of about two years in the issuance of the sanction order -
Quashment of proceedings - Whether warranted
- Held, though, as per provisos to S. 19(1), the process of grant of sanction
must be completed within four months, which includes the extended period of one
month, but the non-compliance with a mandatory period cannot and should not
automatically lead to the quashing of criminal proceedings - However, there must
be a consequence of dereliction of duty to giving sanction within the time specified
and, in this way, the appointing authority can be accountable for the delay in the
grant of sanction - Hence, the competent authority, held, shall be accountable for
the delay and be subject to judicial review and administrative action by CVC under
S. 8(1)(f) of the CVC Act
- Issue as to delay in grant of sanction being not raised before the courts
below, held, there was no material on record to examine the accountability of the
appointing authority for not deciding the request for sanction within time -
Resultantly, the appellant permitted to seek appropriate remedy in accordance with
law
- Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 197 - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
-
S. 482 - Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003, Ss. 8(1)(e) and (f)
Held :
The intention of Parliament is evident from a combined reading of the first
proviso to Section 19, which uses the expression "endeavour" with the subsequent
provisions. The third proviso mandates that the extended period can be granted
only for one month after reasons are recorded in writing. There is no further
extension. The fourth proviso, which empowers the Central Government to
prescribe necessary guidelines for ensuring the mandate, may also be noted in this
regard. It can thus be concluded that Parliament intended that the process of grant
of sanction must be completed within four months, which includes the extended
period of one month.
(Para 30)
However, non-compliance with a mandatory period cannot and should not
automatically lead to the quashing of criminal proceedings because the prosecution
of a public servant for corruption has an element of public interest having a direct
bearing on the rule of law. This is also a non-sequitur. It must also be kept in mind
that the complainant or victim has no other remedy available for judicial redressal if
the criminal proceedings stand automatically quashed. At the same time, a decision
to grant deemed sanction may cause prejudice to the rights of the accused as
there would also be non-application of mind in such cases.
(Para 32)
It is in between these competing interests that the Court must maintain the
delicate balance. While arriving at this balance, the Court must keep in mind the
duty cast on the competent authority to grant sanction within the stipulated period
of time. There must be a consequence of dereliction of duty to giving sanction
within the time specified. The way forward is to make the appointing authority
accountable for the delay in the grant of sanction.
(Para 33)
Accountability has three essential constituent dimensions : (i) responsibility, (ii)
answerability, and (iii) enforceability.
(Para 36)
Responsibility for grant of sanction for prosecution of a public servant under
Section 19 of the PC Act is always vested in the appointing authority. Identification
of appointing authority is always clear and straightforward. The 2018 Amendment
specifically obligates the appointing authority to convey the decision within three
months and to provide for the reasons to be recorded in writing for the extended
period of one month. This amendment, in fact, evidences legislative incorporation of
answerability, the second constituent of accountability. For enforceability,
Parliament has expressly empowered the Central Vigilance Commission under
Section 8(1)(f) of the CVC Act to review the progress of the applications pending
with the competent authorities, and this function must take within its sweep the
power to deal with the consequences of failure of the competent authority to
comply with its statutory duty. This power and responsibility of CVC is clear from
the provisions of the statute and decipherable from functions entrusted to it.
(Para 37)
In conclusion, upon expiry of the three months and the additional one-month
period, the aggrieved party, be it the complainant, accused or victim, would be
entitled to approach the writ court concerned. They are entitled to seek appropriate
remedies, including directions for action on the request for sanction and for the
corrective measure on accountability that the sanctioning authority bears. This is
especially crucial if the non-grant of sanction is withheld without reason, resulting in
the stifling of a genuine case of corruption. Simultaneously, CVC shall enquire into
the matter in the exercise of its powers under Sections 8(1)(e) and (f) and take
such corrective action as it is empowered under the CVC Act.
(Para 38)
The second issue is answered by holding that the period of three months,
extended by one more month for legal consultation, is mandatory. The
consequence of non-compliance with this mandatory requirement shall not be
quashing of the criminal proceeding for that very reason. The competent authority
shall be accountable for the delay and be subject to judicial review and
administrative action by CVC under Section 8(1)(f) of the CVC Act.
(Para 39)
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. No. 10, p. 51; H.M. Seervai : Constitutional
Law of India, 4th Edn., Vol. 3, p. 2987, referred to
D. Public Accountability, Vigilance and Prevention of Corruption -
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 - S. 19 - Sanction for prosecution -
Object and public policy behind the provision, reiterated - Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973, S. 197
Held :
The public policy behind providing immunity from prosecution without the
sanction of the State is to insulate the public servant against harassment and
malicious prosecution. It is for this very reason that good faith clauses are
incorporated in statutes extending protection to officers exercising statutory duties
in good faith. This protection is only to ensure that a public servant serves the State
with courage, confidence, and conviction. However, the said protection is neither a
shield against dereliction of duty nor an absolute immunity against corrupt practices.
The limited immunity or bar is only subject to a sanction by the appointing
authority.
(Paras 21 and 22)
SK-D/69437/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Mahesh Jethmalani, Senior Advocate [P.V. Yogeswaran (Advocate-on
-Record), Ashish Kr. Upadhyay, Ms Mugdha Pandey, Y. Lokesh, V. Sibi
Kargil, V. Kandhan Prabhu, Arun Singh, Anubhav Chaturvedi, Pankaj Kr.
Agarwal, Surya Narayan Patro, L.R. Venkatesan, C. Thangaraja, Ms
Shiwani Tushir, Ms Maitri Goal and Ms Priyanka Chowdhary, Advocates],
for the Appellant;
S.V. Raju, Additional Solicitor General [Arvind Kr. Sharma (Advocate
-on-Record), Advocate], for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
334g, 336b-c, 336c-d,
348e
1
338e
Aggarwal
338e
336f-g, 343c, 344f-g,
Manmohan Singh
345b, 345f-g, 346a-b
of Punjab V. Mohd. lqbal Bhatti
338d
of Karnataka V. Ameerjan
338e
Romesh Lal Jain V. Naginder Singh Rana
338d
Krishnamurthy V. State of Karnataka
338e
(Anti-Corruption Branch) V. R.C Anand
338e
of Bihar
342b-c
Mahendra Lal Das V. State of Bihar
342b-c
Narain V. Union of India
336f, 339a-b, 342c, 344f-g
V. State of Gujarat
336e, 337c-d, 338a, 338d
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
P.S. NARASIMHA, J. - Leave granted. Two important questions of law
arise for consideration in this appeal. The first question is whether an
order of the appointing authority granting sanction for prosecution of a
public servant under Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 (hereinafter referred to as "the PC Act"), would be rendered illegal
on the ground of acting as per dictation if it consults the Central
Vigilance Commission for its decision. The second question is whether
the period of three months (extendable by one more month for legal
consultation1 for the appointing authority to decide upon a request for
sanction is mandatory or not. The further question in this context, is
whether the criminal proceedings can be quashed if the decision is not
taken within the mandatory period.
Facts leading to the filing of this appeal
2. The appellant challenges the order2 of the High Court of
Judicature at Madras allowing a criminal revision petition filed by the
State against an order of the trial court³, discharging the appellant on
the ground that the order of sanction under Section 19 of the PC Act, is
vitiated due to non-application of mind by the sanctioning authority.
3. The appellant is an official of the Central Secretarial Service,
Government of India. During the period between 1-1-2005 to 31-10-
2012, when his official postings were in New Delhi and Bangalore, he is
alleged to have acquired assets that were disproportionate to his known
sources of income. As of 31-12-2012, he and his relatives were found
to be in possession of disproportionate assets to the tune of Rs
79,17,593. An FIR came to be registered on 20-11-2012 by the Central
Bureau of Investigation (hereinafter referred as "CBI") against the
appellant, his father, and his mother under Section 109 of the Penal
Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "IPC"), read with Sections 13(1)
(e) and 13(2) of the PC Act.
4. On 8-9-2015, CBI completed investigation and sought sanction
from the appointing authority, the Department of Personnel and
Training (hereinafter referred to as "DoPT"), for prosecuting the
appellant. As the questions arising for consideration relate to the
manner and the time taken for granting sanction for prosecution, the
relevant facts will have to be mentioned in detail. They are as follows.
5. About two months after receiving the proposal for sanction, on 26
-11-2015, the DoPT examined the facts of the case and sought 23
clarifications from CBI. A month after that i.e. on 15-12-2015, CBI
gave clarifications on the same questions. Upon reviewing the
clarifications, the DoPT believed that there were many errors in the
investigation conducted by CBI, and therefore sought the opinion of the
Central Vigilance Commission (hereinafter referred to as "CVC") on 7-1-
2016.
6. CVC followed it up and sought clarification from CBI on 18-3-2016
i.e. two-and-a-half months after the opinion of CVC. After examining
the clarifications tendered by CBI, CVC believed that this to be a strong
case for grant of sanction subject to CBI conducting a re-investigation
on certain aspects of the case. This opinion was communicated to the
DoPT on 1-6-2016.
7. Since the communication dated 1-6-2016 was unclear, the DoPT
vide letter dated 26-8-2016 sought to know whether CVC
recommended the grant of sanction or whether CVC had advised CBI to
re-investigate. A month later, on 20-9-2016, CVC clarified to the DoPT
that CBI should re-investigate the matter and come up with its revised
findings. Accordingly, the DoPT informed CVC on 5-10-2016 that it will
treat the proposal for sanction for prosecution of the appellant as closed
until the re-investigation is completed and a new proposal is received
from CBI. By this time, thirteen months had passed since the request
for sanction was made.
8. Meanwhile, on 27-9-2016, CBI submitted a revised explanation to
the seven questions posed by CVC. Satisfied with the same, CVC
advised DoPT on 25-11-2016 to grant sanction. Responding to the
proposal, DoPT, by its letter dated 16-12-2016, sought to know if CBI
had completed the re-investigation, to which CVC responded on 9-2-
2017, stating that it was satisfied with the proposal of CBI. Finally, on
24-7-2017, DoPT granted sanction for prosecution. Thus, the proposal
requesting the sanction for prosecution made by CBI on 8-9-2015 was
given by the sanctioning authority on 24-7-2017, after about one year
and ten months.
Before the trial court
9. The appellant filed a discharge application under Section 227 CrPC
before the Principal Special Judge for CBI. This application was filed on
the ground that the sanction order was passed without application of
mind. The trial court by its order dated 13-12-2018, allowed the
application and discharged the appellant. The reason for allowing the
application for discharge was that the DoPT failed to apply its mind and
merely relied on the advice tendered by CVC.
Before the High Court
10. Against the abovereferred order of the Principal Special Judge for
CBI, the State filed a criminal revision petition under Section 397 CrPC,
which was allowed2 by the High Court of Judicature at Madras. The High
Court held that under Section 8(1)(g) of the Central Vigilance
Commission Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as "the CVC Act"), one of
the functions of CVC is to tender advice to the Central Government on
the matter of grant of sanction. Thus, it was opined that the advice of
CVC could not be treated as irrelevant material. The High Court also
held that the DoPT, in addition to the advice of CVC, had taken into
account all the relevant material and had independently applied its
mind before granting sanction to prosecute the appellant. It is this
order2 of the High Court which is impugned before us.
Submissions of learned counsel
11. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani learned Senior Counsel, and Shri P.V.
Yogeswaran, AOR, appearing on behalf of the appellant, made two
submissions. Firstly, Shri Jethmalani submitted that the grant of
sanction by DoPT dated 24-7-2017 is without application of an
independent mind. He argued that the sanction for prosecution was hit
by non-application of mind as DoPT had acted on dictation by CVC, and
for this purpose, the said sanction order must be set aside. In support
of this submission, he relied on the decision of this Court in Mansukhlal
Vithaldas Chauhan V. State of Gujarat4.
12. The second submission of Shri Jethmalani is about the delay in
granting the sanction for prosecution. While CBI requested for sanction
on 18-9-2015, the order of sanction came to be passed on 24-7-2017,
after almost two years. According to Shri Jethmalani, this delay is fatal,
the consequence being that the proceedings against the appellant must
be quashed. For this purpose, he relied on the decision of this Court in
Vineet Narain V. Union of India5 followed by Subramanian Swamy V.
Manmohan Singh6 as per which this Court has set an outer limit of
three months for granting sanction.
13. Shri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General for India
would submit that the DoPT, while granting sanction for prosecution,
merely called for and considered the report of CVC and had, in fact
applied its independent mind. He took us through the correspondence
between CBI, CVC, and DoPT to make his point good.
14. Replying to the second submission made by Shri Jethmalani, the
learned ASG submits that this issue was never raised at any point. For
that matter, even the special leave petition does not contain any
ground to this effect. However, as the Court heard submissions on the
ground of delay, he clarified that the time period is merely directory
and not mandatory. He would further submit that, as per the
abovereferred decisions of this Court, the consequence of non-grant of
sanction within three months would only be deemed sanction, rather
than quashing the criminal proceedings.
15. Having heard the parties in detail, we formulate two issues for
our consideration. While the first issue pertains to whether the order of
sanction is illegal due to non-application of mind by the DoPT for acting
as per dictation of CVC, the second issue pertains to whether the
criminal proceedings could be quashed for the delay of about two years
in the issuance of the sanction order. We will answer both issues.
Re Issue 1 : Whether the order of sanction is illegal due to non-
application of mind and acting as per dictation if the appointing
authority, the DoPT refers and considers the opinion and advice
of CVC?
16. At the outset, we will take note of the ratio in Mansukhlal relied
on by Shri Jethmalani. Relevant portion of the judgment holding that "if
the sanctioning authority is under an obligation or compulsion to grant
sanction, the order will be bad for the reason that the discretion is
"18. The validity of the sanction would, therefore, depend upon
the material placed before the sanctioning authority and the fact that
all the relevant facts, material and evidence have been considered by
the sanctioning authority. Consideration implies application of mind.
The order of sanction must ex facie disclose that the sanctioning
authority had considered the evidence and other material placed
before it. This fact can also be established by extrinsic evidence by
placing the relevant files before the Court to show that all relevant
facts were considered by the sanctioning authority.
19. Since the validity of "sanction" depends on the applicability of
mind by the sanctioning authority to the facts of the case as also the
material and evidence collected during investigation, it necessarily
follows that the sanctioning authority has to apply its own
independent mind for the generation of genuine satisfaction whether
prosecution has to be sanctioned or not. The mind of the sanctioning
authority should not be under pressure from any quarter nor should
any external force be acting upon it to take a decision one way or the
other. Since the discretion to grant or not to grant sanction vests
absolutely in the sanctioning authority, its discretion should be
shown to have not been affected by any extraneous consideration. If
it is shown that the sanctioning authority was unable to apply its
independent mind for any reason whatsoever or was under an
obligation or compulsion or constraint to grant the sanction, the
order will
be bad for the reason that the discretion of the authority "not to
sanction" was taken away and it was compelled to act mechanically to
sanction the prosecution."
(emphasis supplied)
17. The decision in Mansukhlal4 was rendered in the year 1997,
when the legislative changes to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as "CrPC"), were not made. Further, the
decision was prior to the enactment of the CVC Act and also the
amendments to the PC Act. The submission of Shri Jethmalani therefore
overlooks the march of law, which we have endeavoured to explain
hereinunder.
18. Sanction for prosecution of an employee of the Union under the
PC Act would involve invocation of specific provisions of CrPC, the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as "the
DSPE Act"), the PC Act, and the CVC Act, all of which constitute a
unified scheme. The legal regime that encompasses the abovereferred
statutes for matters concerning preliminary inquiry, investigation,
sanction, and prosecution are well integrated and can be recounted as
under:
18.1. Section 197 CrPC provides a mandatory requirement of
sanction for the prosecution of Judges, Magistrates, and public
servants. While interpreting this provision, this Court has identified two
principles, which are that, (a) there must be relevant material placed
before the sanctioning authority before it takes a decision; and (b) the
decision of the sanctioning authority must itself indicate that it had
applied its mind before granting sanction-. It is in this context that the
judgment of this Court in Mansukhlal4 must be understood [Section
197 CrPC].
18.2. Section 19 of the PC Act also provides for a requirement of
sanction before prosecution. The requirement of law for having relevant
material placed before the sanctioning authority, as well as the
independent application of mind by the said authority, applies with
equal vigour to sanction under the PC Act [Section 19, the PC Act].
18.3. For the purpose of assisting the sanctioning authority in
arriving at a decision, the Government, through a 1997 Resolution,
constituted a body under the Ministry of Home Affairs referred to as
CVC. An Independent Review Committee (IRC), constituted by the
Government of India, also suggested conferring statutory status to
CVC. This recommendation became compelling after the decision of this
Court in Vineet Narain5. These directions resulted in the promulgation
of three Ordinances for giving statutory status to CVC, and eventually,
in 2003, Parliament enacted the CVC Act.
18.4. The Preamble to the CVC Act states that the Commission is
constituted to inquire or cause inquiries to be conducted into offences
alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988. Section 8 of the CVC Act evidences the interplay of powers and
duties of the three agencies, being the sanctioning authority (Union
Government), the prosecuting agency (CBI), and the advisory body
(CVC), all subserving the same public interest of ensuring integrity in
governance. The following provisions evidence the same.
18.5. CVC shall exercise superintendence over CBI in relation to the
investigation of offences under the PC Act [Section 8(1)(a), the CVC
Act]. CVC shall also give directions to CBI in the discharge of its
functions under Section 4(1) of the DSPE Act [Section 8(1)(b), the CVC
Act].
18.6. CVC shall inquire on a reference made to it by the Central
Government (DoPT) about an alleged offence committed by a public
servant under the PC Act [Section 8(1)(c), the CVC Act]. CVC shall also
inquire into any complaint against a public servant alleged to have
committed an offence under the PC Act [Section 8(1)(d), the CVC Act].
18.7. CVC shall review the progress of the investigation by CBI for
offences under the PC Act [Section 8(1)(e), the CVC Act].
18.8. CVC shall tender advice to the Central Government on such
matters as may be referred to it [Section 8(1)(g), the CVC Act].
18.9. CVC shall exercise limited superintendence over vigilance
administration of various Ministries of the Central Government [Section
(1)(h), the CVC Act].
18.10. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to
as "the Lokpal Act"), enacted to subserve the same purpose of
maintaining integrity concerning certain public functionaries, makes
further amendments to the four statutes we have dealt with
hereinabove, further integrating them with each other. The Lokpal Act
amended Section 8 and also inserted Sections 8-A and 8-B to the CVC
Act [Sections 8-A and 8-B of the CVC Act].
18.11. After a preliminary inquiry relating to corruption of public
servants belonging to Group C or Group D, if CVC comes to a prima
facie opinion of violation of conduct rules relating to corruption under
the PC Act, CVC shall (a) direct CBI to investigate, or (b) initiate
disciplinary proceedings; or (c) close these proceedings and proceed
under the Lokpal Act [Section 8-A(1), the CVC
Act]. If CVC decides to direct an agency (including CBI) to investigate,
it can direct an expeditious investigation within a time-frame, and CBI
shall submit an investigation report to CVC within that time-frame
[Sections 8-B(1) and 8-B(2), the CVC Act]. On consideration of the
report, CVC may decide to (a) file a charge-sheet or closure report; or
(b) initiate departmental proceedings [Section 8-B (3), the CVC Act].
18.12. In furtherance of a decision to direct prosecution, CVC
exercises its powers under Section 8 to review the progress of
applications pending with competent authorities for sanction of
prosecution under the PC Act. [Section 8(1)(f), the CVC Act]
18.13. The appropriate Government or the competent authority is
obligated, under the 2018 Amendment to the PC Act, to endeavour to
convey the decision on the proposal for sanction within three months
with an extended period of one more month when legal consultation is
required. For this purpose, guidelines may be prescribed. CVC has, in
fact, issued necessary guidelines in furtherance of this duty. [Proviso to
Section 19(1) of the PC Act]
19. It is evident from the abovereferred formulation that the position
of law and the legal regime obtained by virtue of the five legislations on
the subject of corruption, operates as integrated scheme. The five
legislations being the CrPC, the DSPE Act, the PC Act, the CVC Act, and
the Lokpal Act, must be read together to enable the authorities to
subserve the common purpose and objectives underlying these
legislations. The Central Vigilance Commission constituted under the
CVC Act is specifically entrusted with the duty and function of providing
expert advice on the subject. It may be necessary for the appointing
authority to call for and seek the opinion of CVC before it takes any
decision on the request for sanction for prosecution. The statutory
scheme under which the appointing authority could call for, seek and
consider the advice of CVC can neither be termed as acting under
dictation nor a factor which could be referred to as an irrelevant
consideration. The opinion of CVC is only advisory. It is nevertheless a
valuable input in the decision-making process of the appointing
authority. The final decision of the appointing authority must be of its
own by application of independent mind. The issue is, therefore,
answered by holding that there is no illegality in the action of the
appointing authority, the DoPT, if it calls for, refers, and considers the
opinion of the Central Vigilance Commission before it takes its final
decision on the request for sanction for prosecuting a public servant.
20. Returning to the case facts, we have examined the
correspondence and the long-drawn communications between CBI, the
DoPT, and CVC. We found that the inquiry made by the appointing
authority, the DoPT, was only for soliciting further information, and
particularly the opinion given by CVC is also advisory. The sanction
order of the DoPT dated 24-7-2017 is an independent decision of the
department that was taken based on the material before it. Under these
circumstances, we are not inclined to accept the first submission made
on
behalf of the appellant that the order of sanction suffers from illegality
due to non-application of mind or acting under dictation.
Re Issue 2 : Whether the criminal proceedings could be quashed
for the delay in the issuance of the sanction order?
21. The public policy behind providing immunity from prosecution
without the sanction of the State is to insulate the public servant
against harassment and malicious prosecution. It is for this very reason
that good faith clauses are incorporated in statutes extending
protection to officers exercising statutory duties in good faith. This
protection is only to ensure that a public servant serves the State with
courage, confidence, and conviction. It is apt to recall the speech of the
then Home Minister, Shri Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, during the
Constituent Assembly Debates10, also referred to by H.M. Seervai in his
commentary on the Constitution while dealing with the Services under
the State11 : (CAD Vol. 10, p. 51)
"
Today, my Secretary can write a note opposed to my views. I
have given that freedom to all my Secretaries. I have told them 'If
you do not give your honest opinion for fear that it will displease
your Minister, please then you had better go. I will bring another
Secretary.' I will never be displeased over a frank expression of
opinion."
22. Statutory provisions requiring sanction before prosecution either
under Section 197 CrPC or under Section 97 of the PC Act also intend to
serve the very same purpose of protecting a public servant. These
protections are not available to other citizens because of the inherent
vulnerabilities of a public servant and the need to protect them.
However, the said protection is neither
a shield against dereliction of duty nor an absolute immunity against
corrupt practices. The limited immunity or bar is only subject to a
sanction by the appointing authority.
23. Grant of sanction being an exercise of executive power, it is
subject to the standard principles of judicial review such as application
of independent mind; only by the competent authority, without bias,
after consideration of relevant material and by eschewing irrelevant
considerations. As the power to grant sanction for prosecution has legal
consequences, it must naturally be exercised within a reasonable
period. This principle is anyway inbuilt in our legal structure, and our
constitutional courts review the legality and proprietary of delayed
exercise of power quite frequently. In Mahendra Lal Das V. State of
Bihar12 and Ramanand Chaudhary V. State of Bihar13 this Court found it
expedient to quash the criminal proceedings due to the abnormal delay
in granting a sanction for prosecution.
24. Noticing that there is no legislation prescribing the period within
which a decision for sanction is to be taken, this Court, in Vineet
Narain5, sought to
fill the gap by setting a normative prescription of three months for
"58. I. .(15) Time-limit of three months for grant of sanction for
prosecution must be strictly adhered to. However, additional time of
one month may be allowed where consultation is required with the
Attorney General (AG) or any other law officer in the AG's office."
25. Legislative reforms for expeditious grant of sanction for
prosecution started with the enactment of the CVC Act, whereunder
Parliament has expressly empowered CVC under Section 8(1)(f) of the
CVC Act to review the progress of applications for sanction14.
26. While exercising the powers under Section 8(1)(f), CVC has
been issuing guidelines and instructions to various departments for
expeditious disposal of requests for sanction. Despite these legislative
changes and administrative guidelines, delay in granting sanctions
continued. In Subramanian Swamy case6, this Court suggested that
Parliament may consider prescribing clear time-limits for the grant of
sanction and to provide for a deemed sanction by the end of the period
"81. In my view, Parliament should consider the constitutional
imperative of Article 14 enshrining the rule of law wherein "due
process of law" has been read into by introducing a time-limit in
Section 19 of the PC Act, 1988 for its working in a reasonable
manner. Parliament may, in my opinion, consider the following
guidelines:
(a) All proposals for sanction placed before any sanctioning
authority empowered to grant sanction for prosecution of a public
servant under Section 19 of the PC Act must be decided within a
period of three months of the receipt of the proposal by the
authority concerned.
(b) Where consultation is required with the Attorney General or
the Solicitor General or the Advocate General of the State, as the
case may be, and the same is not possible within the three
months mentioned in clause (a) above, an extension of one month
period may be allowed, but the request for consultation is to be
sent in writing within the three months mentioned in clause (a)
above. A copy of the said request will be sent to the prosecuting
agency or the private complainant to intimate them about the
extension of the time-limit.
(c) At the end of the extended period of time-limit, if no
decision is taken, sanction will be deemed to have been granted
to the proposal for prosecution, and the prosecuting agency or the
private complainant will proceed to file the charge-
sheet/complaint in the court to commence prosecution within 15
days of the expiry of the aforementioned time-limit."
(emphasis supplied)
27. Yet another legislative development took place in 2018 when
Parliament, by way of an amendment to the PC Act, inserted the
following provisos to Section 19 of the PC Act:
"19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution. (1) No
court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Sections
7, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been committed by a public
servant, except with the previous sanction [save as otherwise
provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013]
(a) in the case of
(b) in the case of
(c) in the case of
*
*
*
Provided further that
Provided also that the appropriate Government or any
competent authority shall, after the receipt of the proposal
requiring sanction for prosecution of a public servant under this
sub-section, endeavour to convey the decision on such proposal
within a period of three months from the date of its receipt:
Provided also that in case where, for the purpose of grant of
sanction for prosecution, legal consultation is required, such
period may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended
by a further period of one month:
Provided also that the Central Government may, for the
purpose of sanction for prosecution of a public servant, prescribe
such guidelines as it considers necessary."
(emphasis supplied)
28. The new proviso to Section 19 mandating that the competent
authority shall endeavour to convey the decision on the proposal for
sanction within a period of three months can only be read and
understood as a compelling statutory obligation. We are not inclined to
accept the submission of the learned ASG that this proviso is only
directory in nature. In the first place, the consistent effort made by all
branches of the State, the judiciary15, the legislative16 and
the executive 17 , to ensure early decision-making by the competent
authority cannot be watered down by lexical interpretation of the
expression endeavour in the proviso.
29. The sanctioning authority must bear in mind that public
confidence in the maintenance of the rule of law, which is fundamental
in the administration of justice, is at stake here. By causing delay in
considering the request for sanction, the sanctioning authority stultifies
judicial scrutiny, thereby vitiating the process of determination of the
allegations against the corrupt official Subramanian Swamy6. Delays in
prosecuting the corrupt breeds a culture of impunity and leads to
systemic resignation to the existence of corruption in public life. Such
inaction is fraught with the risk of making future generations getting
accustomed to corruption as a way of life. Viewed in this context, the
duty to take an early decision inheres in the power vested in the
appointing authority to grant or not to grant sanction. In fact, the
Statement of Objects and Reasons for the 2018 Amendment of Section
19 clearly explain the purpose as under:
"2.
(i)
Further, in the light of a recent judgment of the
Supreme Court, the question of amending Section 19 of the Act to
lay down clear criteria and procedure for sanction of prosecution,
including the stage at which sanction can be sought, timelines within
which order has to be passed, was also examined by the Central
Government and it is proposed to incorporate appropriate provisions
in Section 19 of the Act."18
(emphasis supplied)
30. The intention of Parliament is evident from a combined reading
of the first proviso to Section 19, which uses the expression
"endeavour" with the subsequent provisions. The third proviso
mandates that the extended period can be granted only for one month
after reasons are recorded in writing. There is no further extension. The
fourth proviso, which empowers the Central Government to prescribe
necessary guidelines for ensuring the mandate, may also be noted in
this regard. It can thus be concluded that Parliament intended that the
process of grant of sanction must be completed within four months,
which includes the extended period of one month.
31. If it is mandatory for the sanctioning authority to decide in a
time-bound manner, the consequence of non-compliance with the
mandatory period must be examined. This is a critical question having
no easy answer. In Subramanian Swamy6, this Court suggested that
Parliament may consider providing deemed sanction if a decision is not
taken within the prescribed period. The appellant
herein contends the very opposite that the criminal proceedings must
be quashed if the decision is not taken within the prescribed period.
32. In the first place, non-compliance with a mandatory period
cannot and should not automatically lead to the quashing of criminal
proceedings because the prosecution of a public servant for corruption
has an element of public interest having a direct bearing on the rule of
law6 This is also a non-sequitur. It must also be kept in mind that the
complainant or victim has no other remedy available for judicial
redressal if the criminal proceedings stand automatically quashed. At
the same time, a decision to grant deemed sanction may cause
prejudice to the rights of the accused as there would also be non-
application of mind in such cases.
33. It is in between these competing interests that the Court must
maintain the delicate balance. While arriving at this balance, the Court
must keep in mind the duty cast on the competent authority to grant
sanction within the stipulated period of time. There must be a
consequence of dereliction of duty to giving sanction within the time
specified. The way forward is to make the appointing authority
accountable for the delay in the grant of sanction.
34. Accountability in itself is an essential principle of administrative
law. Judicial review of administrative action will be effective and
meaningful by ensuring accountability of the officer or authority in
charge.
35. The principle of accountability is considered as a cornerstone of
the human rights framework. It is a crucial feature that must govern
the relationship between "duty bearers" in authority and "right holders"
affected by their actions. Accountability of institutions is also one of the
development goals
adopted by the United Nations in 2015 19 and is also recognised as one
of the six principles of the Citizens Charter Movement
36. Accountability has three essential constituent dimensions
:
(i) responsibility, (ii) answerability, and (iii) enforceability.
Responsibility requires the identification of duties and performance
obligations of individuals in authority and with authorities.
Answerability requires reasoned decision-making so that those affected
by their decisions, including the public, are aware of the same.
Enforceability requires appropriate corrective and remedial action
against lack of responsibility and accountability to be taken2.
Accountability has a corrective function, making it possible to address
individual or collective grievances. It enables action against officials or
institutions for dereliction of duty. It also has a preventive function that
helps to identify the procedure or policy which has become non-
functional and to improve upon it.
37. Accountability, as a principle of administrative law, when applied
to the issue that we are dealing with, translates in this manner.
Responsibility for grant of sanction for prosecution of a public servant
under Section 19 of the PC Act is always vested in the appointing
authority. Identification of appointing authority is always clear and
straightforward. The 2018 Amendment specifically obligates the
appointing authority to convey the decision within three months and to
provide for the reasons to be recorded in writing for the extended
period of one month. This amendment, in fact, evidences legislative
incorporation of answerability, the second constituent of accountability.
For enforceability, Parliament has expressly empowered the Central
Vigilance Commission under Section 8(1)(f) of the CVC Act to review
the progress of the applications pending with the competent
authorities, and this function must take within its sweep the power to
deal with the consequences of failure of the competent authority to
comply with its statutory duty. This power and responsibility of CVC is
clear from the provisions of the statute and decipherable from functions
entrusted to it.
38. In conclusion, we hold that upon expiry of the three months and
the additional one-month period, the aggrieved party, be it the
complainant, accused or victim, would be entitled to approach the writ
court concerned. They are entitled to seek appropriate remedies,
including directions for action on the request for sanction and for the
corrective measure on accountability that the sanctioning authority
bears. This is especially crucial if the non-grant of sanction is withheld
without reason, resulting in the stifling of a genuine case of
corruption. Simultaneously, CVC shall enquire into the matter in the
exercise of its powers under Sections 8(1)(e) and (f) and take such
corrective action as it is empowered under the CVC Act.
39. The second issue is answered by holding that the period of three
months, extended by one more month for legal consultation, is
mandatory. The consequence of non-compliance with this mandatory
requirement shall not be quashing of the criminal proceeding for that
The surest way legal research!
very reason. The competent authority shall be accountable for the delay
and be subject to judicial review and administrative action by CVC
under Section 8(1)(f) of the CVC Act.
40. Returning to the facts of the present case, we have noticed that
CBI made the application for sanction for prosecution on 8-9-2015, and
the same was granted on 24-7-2017 i.e. after one year and ten
months. As the appellant did not question the legality of the delay
either before the trial or the High Court but chose to confine the
challenge only to the appointing authority acting under the dictation of
CVC, there was no occasion for CBI to respond to the submission of
delay. The submission was raised for the first time before this Court.
Though the learned ASG submitted that this plea should not be
permitted to be raised, without standing on a technicality, we would
have proceeded to examine the matter if the necessary material were
on record of the case. As there is no material placed on record to
examine the accountability of the appointing authority for not deciding
the request for sanction within time, we leave it to the appellant to
seek appropriate remedy based on principles that we have laid down
hereinabove.
41. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss the criminal appeal
arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1568 of 2022 arising out of the judgment
of the High Court of Madras in State V. Vijay Rajmohan dated 6-1-
2022. We permit the petitioner to raise and seek such remedies as are
permissible in law on the basis of principles laid down by us. The
parties shall bear their own costs.
+
Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1568 of 2022. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
349 of 2019, dt. 6-1-2022) [Affirmed]
1
As per the 2018 Amendment through the second proviso to Section 19(1) of the PC Act.
2
3
Criminal Misc. Petition No. 3908 of 2018 in CC No. 3 of 2018 dated 13-12-2018.
4
5
6
7
8
"14.
The opinion of CVC, which was reaffirmed and ultimately prevailed in according the
sanction, cannot be said to be irrelevant for the reason that clause (g) of Section 8(1) of
the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 provides that it is one of the functions of CVC to
tender advice to the Central Government on such matters as may be referred to it by the
Government."
9 For example, Section 74 of the Forest Act, 1927 or Section 88 of the Food Safety and
Standards Act, 2006 provide as under:
"74. Indemnity for acts done in good faith.-(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against any public servant for anything done in good faith or omitted to
be done likewise, under this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder.
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by a
forest officer while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty except with
the previous sanction of the Government of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir."
"88. Protection of action taken in good faith.-N suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Central Government, the State Government, the Food
Authority and other bodies constituted under this Act or any officer of the Central
Government, the State Government or any member, officer or other employee of such
Authority and bodies or any other officer acting under this Act for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder."
10 Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. No. 10, p. 51
11 H.M. Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, 4th Edn., Vol. 3, p. 2987
"7. In cases of corruption the amount involved is not material but speedy justice is the
mandate of the Constitution being in the interests of the accused as well as that of the
society. Cases relating to corruption are to be dealt with swiftly, promptly and without delay.
investigation against the accused on account of not granting the sanction for more than 13
years. The facts of the present case are almost identical. No useful purpose would be served
to put the appellant at trial at this belated stage.
9. Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we are inclined to quash
the proceedings against the appellant as permitting further prosecution would be a travesty
of justice and a mere ritual or formality so far as the prosecution agency is concerned, and
unnecessary burden as regards the courts."
13
"5. It is not necessary to go into the legal points raised by Mr Jain as we are inclined to
quash the prosecution against the appellant in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this
case. After the raid no action was taken by the prosecution for six years. The Public
Prosecutor consistently opined that no criminal case was made out against the appellant.
The Commissioner on independent consideration refused to grant the sanction but later on at
the asking of the DIG (Vigilance) he changed his view. The prosecution against the appellant
is pending for over a period of thirteen years and it would be a travesty of justice to permit
the prosecution at this stage which would mean that the appellant would suffer the
trial/appeal for another decade. In view of the facts and circumstances of this case we
quash the prosecution pending against the appellant.... "
14 "8. Functions and Powers of Central Vigilance Commission.-(1) The functions and
powers of the Commission shall be to-
*
*
*
(f) review the progress of applications pending with the competent authorities for sanction of
prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988);"
15
Commencing from the concerns expressed in Vineet Narain case [Vineet Narain V. Union of
16
The passing of the CVC Act in 2003, and the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act amending the
provision of the PC Act and the CVC Act and also the 2018 Amendments to the PC Act.
17 The various instructions issued by CVC from time to time from 2003.
18
Bill No. LIII of 2013, GOI (Ex.) Part II Section 2 No. 31 dated 19-8-2013 (amendment
implemented in the year 2018).
6
"76. The sanctioning authority must bear in mind that what is at stake is the public
confidence in the maintenance of the rule of law which is fundamental in the administration of
justice. Delay in granting such sanction has spoilt many valid prosecutions and is adversely
viewed in public mind that in the name of considering a prayer for sanction, a protection is
given to a corrupt public official as a quid pro quo for services rendered by the public official
in the past or may be in the future and the sanctioning authority and the corrupt officials
were or are partners in the same misdeeds.
77. By causing delay in considering the request for sanction, the sanctioning authority
stultifies judicial scrutiny and determination of the allegations against corrupt official and thus
the legitimacy of the judicial institutions is eroded. It, thus, deprives a citizen of his
legitimate and fundamental right to get justice by setting the criminal law in motion and
thereby frustrates his right to access judicial remedy which is a constitutionally protected
right."
19
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 70/1 dated 25-9-2015.
20
Citizens Charter adopted by the Government in the "Conference of Chief Ministers of
various States and Union Territories" held in May 1997 in New Delhi, available from
https://goicharters.nic.in/public/website/home.
21
See Office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Who will be
Accountable? Human Rights and the Post-2015 Development Agenda, available from
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/WhoWillBeAccountable.pdf