(2022) 8 Supreme Court Cases 352 : (2022) 4 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE INDIRA BANERJEE AND J.K. MAHESHWARI, JJ.)
VIDARBHA INDUSTRIES POWER LIMITED
Appellant;
Versus
AXIS BANK LIMITED
Respondent.
Civil Appeal No. 4633 of 2021 , decided on July 12, 2022
A. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - S. 7 - Admission of petition
filed under S. 7 by financial creditor - Discretionary nature of power of NCLT
to admit or not admit the petition - Factors which may be considered by
NCLT in exercising this discretionary power - Consideration by NCLT of the
grounds made out by the corporate debtor against admission, on their own
merits - Law clarified
- Held, ordinarily NCLT would have to exercise its discretion to admit an
application under S. 7 and initiate CIRP on satisfaction of the existence of a
financial debt and default on the part of the corporate debtor in payment of
the debt, unless there are good reasons not to admit the petition - Thus, it
is not mandatory for NCLT to admit petition filed under S. 7 by financial
creditor even when there is : (i) existence of debt, and (ii) default in
payment
- Use of the expression "may" in S. 7(5) - Relevance of - Rule of
literal interpretation - Applicability of
- Existence of award/decree exceeding the amount of debt and capable
of realisation - Relevance of, for exercising discretion under S. 7(5)(a) to
keep the admission of the application of the financial creditor in abeyance
- Viability and overall financial health of corporate debtor -
Consideration of, as relevant factors
- Legislature has, in its wisdom, chosen to use the expression "may" in
S. 7(5)(a) - If S. 7(5)(a) is construed literally the provision must be held
to confer a discretion on the adjudicating authority (NCLT) - Thus, held,
ordinarily, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) would have to exercise its
discretion to admit an application under S. 7 and initiate CIRP on
satisfaction of the existence of a financial debt and default on the part of the
corporate debtor in payment of the debt, unless there are good reasons not
to admit the petition - NCLT has to consider the grounds made out by the
corporate debtor against admission, on their own merits - Thus, if facts and
circumstances so warrant, the adjudicating authority can keep the
admission in abeyance or even reject the application - However, in case of
rejection of an application, the financial creditor is not denuded of the right
to apply afresh for initiation of CIRP, if its dues continue to remain unpaid
- Appellant, a generating company within the meaning of S. 2(28) of the
Electricity Act, 2003 claimed that a sum of Rs 1730 crores was due to it in
terms of the order of APTEL - Respondent financial creditor filed the
application in NCLT for initiation of CIRP against the appellant in its
individual capacity and claimed that a total amount of Rs 553,27,99,322.78
was due from the appellant corporate debtor
- Held, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) was required to apply its mind
to
relevant factors including the feasibility of initiation of CIRP, against an
electricity generating company operated under statutory control, the impact
of MERC's appeal, pending in Supreme Court, order of APTEL and the overall
financial health and viability of the corporate debtor under its existing
management
- Held, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) as also the Appellate Tribunal
(NCLAT) fell in error in holding that once it was found that a debt existed and
a corporate debtor was in default in payment of the debt there would be no
option to the adjudicating authority (NCLT) but to admit the petition under
S. 7 IBC
- In the present case, NCLT directed to reconsider the application of the
appellant for stay of further proceedings on merits in accordance with law -
Interpretation of Statutes - Subsidiary Rules - Mandatory or directory -
Use of "may"
(Paras 53 to 91)
B. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - S. 7 - Non-admission of
application filed under S. 7 - Not a bar to re-applying - In case of rejection
of an application (see Shortnote A), the financial creditor is not denuded of
the right to apply afresh for initiation of CIRP, if its dues continue to remain
unpaid
(Para 79)
C. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Ss. 7 and 9 - Scheme
under with respect to admission of applications by financial and operational
creditors - Distinguished - Held, it is apparent from the use of "shall" and
"may", respectively, that legislature intended S. 9(5)(a) to be mandatory
and S. 7(5)(a) to be discretionary
- The fact that legislature used "may" in S. 7(5)(a) but a different word,
The surest way't to legal research!"
that is, "shall" in the otherwise almost identical provision of S. 9(5)(a)
shows that "may" and "shall" in the two provisions are intended to convey
a different meaning - Further, the legislature has consciously differentiated
between financial creditors and operational creditors, as there is an innate
difference between financial creditors, in the business of investment and
financing, and operational creditors in the business of supply of goods and
services - Interpretation of Statutes - Subsidiary Rules - Mandatory or
directory - Use of "may" and use of "shall"
(Paras 75 to 78)
D. Interpretation of Statutes - Basic Rules Literal
construction/interpretation/A Verbis Legis Non Est Recedendum - The first
and foremost principle of interpretation of a statute is the rule of literal
interpretation - Held, if S. 7(5)(a IBC is construed literally the provision
must be held to confer a discretion on the adjudicating authority (NCLT) -
Further, purposive interpretation can only be resorted to when the plain
words of a statute are ambiguous or if construed literally, the provision
would nullify the object of the statute or otherwise lead to an absurd result
- In this case, held, there is no cogent reason to depart from the rule of
literal construction - Hence, power under S. 7(5)(a) IBC held to be
discretionary in nature (see in detail Shortnote A) - Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016, S. 7
(Paras 65 to 69)
E. Constitution of India - Art. 141 - Ratio decidendi of a case - What is
- Determination of - Manner in which the judgment concerned is to be read
to infer its ratio or rationes decidendi - Need for holistic construal and
understanding of the judgment concerned
- Reiterated, a judgment is a precedent for the question of law that is
raised and decided - The language used in a judgment cannot be read like a
statute - In any case, words and phrases in the judgment cannot be
construed in a truncated manner out of context
The appellant is a generating company within the meaning of Section 2(28) of
the Electricity Act, 2003 and has set up a 600 MW coal-fired thermal power plant
comprising of two units each of 300 MW capacity.
By an Order dated 3-11-2016, the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity ("APTEL"),
allowed the appeal and directed the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission
("MERC") to allow the appellant the actual cost of coal purchased for Unit 1, capped
to the fuel cost for Unit 2 in terms of the FSA that had been executed, till such time
as an FSA was executed in respect of Unit 1. The appellant claims that a sum of Rs
1730 crores is due to the appellant in terms of the said order of APTEL.
On or about 8-12-2016, the appellant filed an application before MERC for
implementation of the directions contained in the Order dated 3-11-2016 of APTEL.
MERC however filed Civil Appeal No. 372 of 2017 in the Supreme Court, challenging
the order of APTEL. The appeal is pending.
In view of the pending appeal of MERC in the Supreme Court, the appellant was
unable to implement the directions of APTEL.
On or about 15-1-2020, the respondent, Axis Bank Ltd., as financial creditor of
the appellant, filed an application under Section 7(2) of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ("IBC") being CP (IB) No. 264 of 2020 before the National
Company Law Tribunal ("NCLT"), Mumbai for initiation of CIRP against the appellant.
The appellant filed a miscellaneous application being MA No. 570 of 2020 in CP
(IB) No. 264 of 2020, sometime in February 2020, seeking stay of proceedings
under Section 7 IBC in NCLT, as long as Civil Appeal No. 372 of 2017 was pending
in the Supreme Court.
By an Order dated 29-1-2021, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) dismissed the
application being MA No. 570 of 2020 filed by the appellant in CP No. 264 of 2020
and refused to stay the CIRP initiated against the appellant.
The adjudicating authority inter alia held:
"22. This authority is required only to see whether there has been a debt and
the corporate debtor defaulted in making the repayments. These two aspects
when satisfied would trigger corporate insolvency. Therefore, the decision of the
authorities as well as of the Hon'ble Apex Court would not affect the
proceedings before this authority one way or the other. Therefore, we are of the
considered opinion that this authority need not stay its hands from considering
the company petition as prayed for. As it is, there has been a considerable delay
in disposal of the company petition. It will accordingly be appropriate that the
company petition is disposed of as expeditiously as possible. Hence ordered."
The appellant filed an appeal before NCLAT, against the aforesaid Order dated 29-
1-2021. The said appeal has been dismissed by the judgment and Order dated 2-3-
2021 impugned in this appeal.
The issue involved in this appeal was whether once it was found that a debt
existed and a corporate debtor was in default in payment of the debt there would
be no option to the adjudicating authority (NCLT) but to admit the petition under
Section 7 IBC?
Answering in the negative, and allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court
Held :
The new Insolvency and Bankruptcy framework has been designed, inter alia, to
facilitate the assessment of viability of an enterprise at a very early stage, and to
ensure a time-bound insolvency resolution process to preserve the economic value
of the enterprise.
(Para 49)
The respondent financial creditor filed the application in NCLT for initiation of CIRP
against the appellant in its individual capacity and not as lead bank on behalf of the
other creditors. The respondent financial creditor claimed that a total amount of Rs
553,27,99,322.78 was due from the appellant corporate debtor to the respondent
financial creditor, of which Rs 42,83,45,538.32 was on account of the interest and
further Rs 11,21,68,673.81 towards penal interest. The principal outstanding
amount was Rs 499,22,85,110.65.
(Para 53)
Both, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) and the Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT)
proceeded on the premise that an application must necessarily be entertained under
Section 7(5)(a) IBC, if a debt existed and the corporate debtor was in default of
payment of debt. In other words, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) found Section 7
(5)(a) IBC to be mandatory. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) was of the view
that Section 7(5)(a) did not admit any other interpretation, with which the
Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) agreed.
(Para 56)
There can be no doubt that a corporate debtor who is in the red should be
resolved expeditiously, following the timelines in the IBC. No extraneous matter
should come in the way. However, the viability and overall financial health of the
corporate debtor are not extraneous matters.
(Para 59)
The Appellate Authority (NCLAT) erred in holding that the adjudicating authority
(NCLT) was only required to see whether there had been a debt and the corporate
debtor had defaulted in making repayment of the debt, and that these two aspects,
if satisfied, would trigger the CIRP. The existence of a financial debt
and default in payment thereof only gave the financial creditor the right to apply for
initiation of CIRP. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) was required to apply its mind
to relevant factors including the feasibility of initiation of CIRP, against an electricity
generating company operated under statutory control, the impact of MERC's
appeal, pending in the Supreme Court, order of APTEL referred to above and the
overall financial health and viability of the corporate debtor under its existing
management.
(Para 61)
The legislature has, in its wisdom, chosen to use the expression "may" in
Section 7(5)(a) IBC. When an adjudicating authority (NCLT) is satisfied that a
default has occurred and the application of a financial creditor is complete and there
are no disciplinary proceedings against proposed resolution professional, it may by
order admit the application. Legislative intent is construed in accordance with the
language used in the statute.
(Para 62)
The meaning and intention of Section 7(5)(a) IBC is to be ascertained from the
phraseology of the provision in the context of the nature and design of the IBC.
(Para 63)
Ordinarily the word "may" is directory. The expression "may admit" confers
discretion to admit. In contrast, the use of the word "shall" postulates a mandatory
requirement. The use of the word "shall" raises a presumption that a provision is
imperative. However, it is well settled that the prima facie presumption about the
provision being imperative may be rebutted by other considerations such as the
scope of the enactment and the consequences flowing from the construction.
(Para 64)
It is well settled that the first and foremost principle of interpretation of a statute
is the rule of literal interpretation. If Section 7(5)(a) IBC is construed literally the
provision must be held to confer a discretion on the adjudicating authority (NCLT).
(Para 65)
Had it been the legislative intent that Section 7(5)(a) IBC should be a mandatory
provision, the legislature would have used the word "shall" and not the word "may".
There is no ambiguity in Section 7(5)(a IBC. Purposive interpretation can only be
resorted to when the plain words of a statute are ambiguous or if construed
literally, the provision would nullify the object of the statute or otherwise lead to an
absurd result. In this case, there is no cogent reason to depart from the rule of
literal construction.
(Para 69)
Significantly, the legislature has in its wisdom used the word "may" in Section 7
(5)(a) IBC in respect of an application for CIRP initiated by a financial creditor
against a corporate debtor but has used the expression "shall" in the otherwise
almost identical provision of Section 9(5) IBC relating to the initiation of CIRP by an
operational creditor.
(Para 75)
The fact that the legislature used "may" in Section 7(5)(a) IBC but a different
word, that is, "shall" in the otherwise almost identical provision of Section 9(5)(a)
shows that "may" and "shall" in the two provisions are intended to convey a
different meaning. It is apparent that the legislature intended Section 9(5)(a IBC to
be mandatory and Section 7(5)(a IBC to be discretionary. An application of an
operational creditor for initiation of CIRP under Section 9(2) IBC is mandatorily
required to be admitted if the application is complete in all respects and in
compliance of the requisites of the IBC and the rules and regulations thereunder,
there is no payment of the unpaid operational debt, if notices for payment or the
invoice have been delivered to the corporate debtor by the operational creditor and
no notice of dispute has been received by the operational creditor. The IBC does
not countenance dishonesty or deliberate failure to repay the dues of an operational
creditor.
(Para 76)
On the other hand, in the case of an application by a financial creditor who might
even initiate proceedings in a representative capacity on behalf of all financial
creditors, the adjudicating authority might examine the expedience of initiation of
CIRP, taking into account all relevant facts and circumstances, including the overall
financial health and viability of the corporate debtor. The adjudicating authority may
in its discretion not admit the application of a financial creditor.
(Para 77)
The legislature has consciously differentiated between financial creditors and
operational creditors, as there is an innate difference between financial creditors, in
the business of investment and financing, and operational creditors in the business
of supply of goods and services.
(Para 78)
If facts and circumstances so warrant, the adjudicating authority can keep the
admission in abeyance or even reject the application. Of course, in case of rejection
of an application, the financial creditor is not denuded of the right to apply afresh for
initiation of CIRP, if its dues continue to remain unpaid.
(Para 79)
challenge to the vires of the IBC, does not consider the question of whether Section
7(5)(a) IBC is mandatory or discretionary. It is well settled that a judgment is a
precedent for the question of law that is raised and decided. The language used in a
judgment cannot be read like a statute. In any case, words and phrases in the
judgment cannot be construed in a truncated manner out of context.
(Para 84)
distinguished
Even though Section 7(5)(a) IBC may confer discretionary power on the
adjudicating authority, such discretionary power cannot be exercised arbitrarily or
capriciously. If the facts and circumstances warrant exercise of discretion in a
particular manner, discretion would have to be exercised in that manner.
(Para 86)
Ordinarily, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) would have to exercise its discretion
to admit an application under Section 7 IBC and initiate CIRP on satisfaction of the
existence of a financial debt and default on the part of the corporate debtor in
payment of the debt, unless there are good reasons not to admit the petition.
(Para 87)
The adjudicating authority (NCLT) has to consider the grounds made out by the
corporate debtor against admission, on its own merits. For example, when
admission is opposed on the ground of existence of an award or a decree in favour
of the corporate debtor, and the awarded/decretal amount exceeds the amount of
the debt, the adjudicating authority would have to exercise its discretion under
Section 7(5)(a) IBC to keep the admission of the application of the financial creditor
in abeyance, unless there is good reason not to do so. The adjudicating authority
may, for example, admit the application of the financial creditor, notwithstanding
any award or decree, if the award/decretal amount is incapable of realisation. The
example is only illustrative.
(Para 88)
reversed
Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission,
:
VN-D/69019/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case :
Jaideep Gupta, Senior Advocate [Mahesh Agarwal, Prateek Seksaria,
Ankur Saigal, Himanshu Satija, Shri Venkatesh, Suhael Buttan, Ms
Divyanshu Garg, Kamakshi Saigal and E.C. Agrawala (Advocate-on-
Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
Dhruv Mehta, Senior Advocate [Syed Jafar Alam (Advocate-on-
Record), Siddharth Ranade, Ms Samrudhi Chothani and Ms Harneet
Kaur, Advocates], for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd. (reversed)
366f, 377g
Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.
(reversed)
358f-g, 363e, 363e-f, 377g
of India
376c, 376g
Innoventive Industries Ltd. V. ICICI Bank
367b, 368a
Surendra Trading Co. V. Juggilal Kamlapat Jute
Mills Co. Ltd.
365b
Power Ltd. V. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
360a, 360b-c, 364a-b,
Commission
365e-f
Kumari V. State of U.P.
372e-f, 373b-c
Premanand V. Mohan Koikal
373a
373b-c
Rattanlal V. State of U.P.
372f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
INDIRA BANERJEE, J.- This appeal under Section 62 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, hereinafter referred to as
"IBC", is against a judgment and Order dated 2-3-2021 passed by the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal ("NCLAT"), New Delhi in
Vidharbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.¹ whereby the learned
Tribunal refused to stay the proceedings initiated by the respondent,
Axis Bank Ltd. against the appellant for initiation of the corporate
insolvency resolution process ("CIRP") under Section 7 IBC.
2. The appellant is a generating company within the meaning of
Section 2(28) of the Electricity Act, 2003 and has set up a 600 MW coal
-fired thermal power plant comprising of two units each of 300 MW
capacity, within the Butibori Industrial Area in Nagpur District in
Maharashtra.
3. Under the Electricity Act, 2003, and the Rules and Regulations
framed thereunder, the business of electricity generating companies is
regulated and controlled by the State Electricity Regulatory Commission
constituted
under the said Act. Under Sections 61 to 63 of the Electricity Act, the
State Electricity Regulatory Commission determines the tariff
chargeable by electricity generating companies.
4. Through an international competitive bidding process conducted
by Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation ("MIDC"), the
appellant was awarded the contract for implementation of a Group
Power Project ("GPP"). The GPP was later converted into an
Independent Power Project ("IPP").
5. The appellant was later permitted to expand the capacity of its
power plant by adding a second unit of 300 MW as an IPP. By an Order
dated 20-2-2013, the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission,
hereinafter referred to as "MERC", approved a power procurement
agreement between the appellant and Reliance Industries Ltd. ("RIL")
subject to no-objection certificate ("NOC") of MIDC. MIDC granted its
NOC to the power project agreement.
6. On 21-6-2013, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
("CCEA") amended the New Coal Distribution Policy 2007, pursuant to
which the Ministry of Coal ("MoC") issued an Order on 17-7-2013
directing Coal India Ltd. ("CIL") to sign fuel supply agreements ("FSA")
with power projects with an aggregate capacity of 78,000 MW.
7. On 17-7-2013, the Ministry of Power issued a list of power
projects with an aggregate capacity of 78,000 MW that were eligible to
execute FSAs with CIL. The appellant was not included in the list.
8. On 19-7-2013, MERC granted approval to RIL to procure power
from the appellant's Unit 1. Accordingly, a consolidated power purchase
agreement was executed on 14-8-2013 between the appellant and RIL
under which the appellant agreed to supply and RIL agreed to
purchase, power generated from both units of the appellant's power
plant.
9. On 21-2-2014, the Standing Linkage Committee held a meeting
wherein the appellant's application for conversion of Unit 1 from GPP to
IPP for the purpose of executing FSA was approved.
10. On 1-4-2014, the appellant commenced supply of power to RIL
pursuant to the power purchase agreement approved by MERC. By an
Order dated 9-3-2015, in Case No. 115 of 2014, MERC approved the
final tariff of the power plant of the appellant for Financial Years 2014-
2015 and 2015-2016.
11. In January 2016, the appellant filed an application being Case
No. 91 of 2015 before MERC for the purpose of truing up the aggregate
revenue requirement and for determination of tariff in terms of MERC
(Multi-Year Tariff) Regulations, 2011, in view of, inter alia, the increase
in fuel costs, consequential to the rise in the cost of procuring coal for
the purpose of running the power plant.
12. By an Order dated 20-6-2016, MERC disposed of Case No. 91 of
2015 disallowing a substantial portion of the actual fuel costs as
claimed by the appellant for Financial Years 2014-2015 and 2015-2016
and also capped the tariff for Financial Years 2016-2017 to 2019-2020.
13. Being aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal being Appeal No.
192 of 2016 before the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity ("APTEL"),
challenging disallowance of the actual fuel cost for Financial Years 2014
-2015 and 2015-2016.
14. By an Order dated 3-11-2016 APTEL allowed the appeal and
directed MERC to allow the appellant the actual cost of coal purchased
for Unit 1, capped to the fuel cost for Unit 2 in terms of the FSA that
had been executed, till such time as an FSA was executed in respect of
Unit 1. The appellant claims that a sum of Rs 1730 crores is due to the
appellant in terms of the said order of APTEL.
15. On or about 8-12-2016, the appellant filed an application before
MERC for implementation of the directions contained in the Order dated
3-11-2016 of APTEL. MERC however filed Civil Appeal No. 372 of 2017
in this Court, challenging the order of APTEL. The appeal is pending.
16. In view of the pending appeal of MERC in this Court, the
appellant is unable to implement the directions of APTEL. The appellant
is, for the time being, short of funds. According to the appellant,
implementation of the orders of APTEL would enable the appellant to
clear all its outstanding liabilities.
17. Sections 6 and 7 IBC provide:
"6. Persons who may initiate corporate insolvency
resolution process.-Where any corporate debtor commits a
default, a financial creditor, an operational creditor or the corporate
debtor itself may initiate corporate insolvency resolution process in
respect of such corporate debtor in the manner as provided under
this Chapter.
7. Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by
financial creditor.-(1) A financial creditor either by itself or jointly
with other financial creditors, or any other person on behalf of the
financial creditor, as may be notified by the Central Government,
may file an application for initiating corporate insolvency resolution
process against a corporate debtor before the adjudicating authority
when a default has occurred:
Provided that for the financial creditors, referred to in clauses (a)
and (b) of sub-section (6-A) of Section 21, an application for
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process against the
corporate debtor shall be filed jointly by not less than one hundred of
such creditors in the same class or not less than ten per cent of the
total number of such creditors in the same class, whichever is less:
Provided further that for financial creditors who are allottees under
a real estate project, an application for initiating corporate insolvency
resolution process against the corporate debtor shall be filed jointly
by not less than one hundred of such allottees under the same real
estate project or not less than ten per cent of the total number of
such allottees under the same real estate project, whichever is less:
Provided also that where an application for initiating the corporate
insolvency resolution process against a corporate debtor has been
filed by a financial creditor referred to in the first and second
provisos and has not
been admitted by the adjudicating authority before the commencement
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2020, such
application shall be modified to comply with the requirements of the
first or second proviso within thirty days of the commencement of the
said Act, failing which the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn
before its admission.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a default
includes a default in respect of a financial debt owed not only to the
applicant financial creditor but to any other financial creditor of the
corporate debtor.
(2) The financial creditor shall make an application under sub-
section (1) in such form and manner and accompanied with such fee
as may be prescribed.
(3) The financial creditor shall, along with the application
furnish-
(a) record of the default recorded with the information utility or
such other record or evidence of default as may be specified;
(b) the name of the resolution professional proposed to act as
an interim resolution professional; and
(c) any other information as may be specified by the Board.
(4) The adjudicating authority shall, within fourteen days of the
receipt of the application under sub-section (2), ascertain the
existence of a default from the records of an information utility or on
the basis of other evidence furnished by the financial creditor under
sub-section (3):
Provided that if the adjudicating authority has not ascertained the
existence of default and passed an order under sub-section (5)
within such time, it shall record its reasons in writing for the same.
(5) Where the adjudicating authority is satisfied that-
(a) a default has occurred and the application under sub-
section (2) is complete, and there is no disciplinary proceedings
pending against the proposed resolution professional, it may, by
order, admit such application; or
(b) default has not occurred or the application under sub-
section (2) is incomplete or any disciplinary proceeding is pending
against the proposed resolution professional, it may, by order,
reject such application:
Provided that the adjudicating authority shall, before rejecting the
application under clause (b) of sub-section (5), give a notice to the
applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven days of
receipt of such notice from the adjudicating authority.
(6) The corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence
from the date of admission of the application under sub-section (5).
(7) The adjudicating authority shall communicate-
(a) the order under clause (a) of sub-section (5) to the
financial creditor and the corporate debtor;
(b) the order under clause (b) of sub-section (5) to the
financial creditor, within seven days of admission or rejection of
such application, as the case may be."
18. On or about 15-1-2020, the respondent, Axis Bank Ltd., as
financial creditor of the appellant, filed an application under Section 7
(2) IBC being CP (IB) No. 264 of 2020 before the National Company
Law Tribunal ("NCLT"), Mumbai for initiation of CIRP against the
appellant.
19. The appellant filed a miscellaneous application being MA No. 570
of 2020 in CP (IB) No. 264 of 2020, sometime in February 2020,
seeking stay of proceedings under Section 7 IBC in NCLT, as long as
Civil Appeal No. 372 of 2017 was pending in this Court.
20. By an Order dated 29-1-2021 ³, the adjudicating authority
(NCLT) dismissed the application being MA No. 570 of 2020 filed by the
appellant in CP No. 264 of 2020 and refused to stay the CIRP initiated
against the appellant.
21. The adjudicating authority held : (Vidarbha Industries Power ³,
"19. The Code is a special legislation. The chief object of which is
to decide the petition in a time-bound manner and take adequate
steps to see that the corporate debtor remains a going concern even
during the process of CIRP.
20. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. V. Union of
India4 have set the tone for the proceeding before the adjudicating
authority in order to make all endeavour to dispose of the matter in a
time-bound manner. The observation of the Hon'ble Court may
`27. As is discernible, the Preamble gives an insight into what is
sought to be achieved by the Code. The Code is first and foremost, a
Code for reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate
debtors. Unless such reorganisation is effected in a time-bound
manner, the value of the assets of such persons will deplete.
Timely resolution of a corporate debtor who is in the red, by an
effective legal framework, would go a long way to support the
development of credit markets.
28.
The timelines within which the resolution process is to take
place again protects the corporate debtor's assets from further
dilution, and also protects all its creditors and workers by seeing that
the resolution process goes through as fast as possible so that
another management can, through its entrepreneurial skills,
resuscitate the corporate debtor to achieve all these ends'.
21. The observation would indicate that no other extraneous
matter should come in the way of expeditiously deciding a petition
either under Section 7 or under Section 9 of the Code. The inability
of the corporate debtor in servicing the debts or the reason for
committing a default is alien to the scheme of the Code. The
averments made in the instant application
would indicate that various factors apparently hindered the corporate
debtor from carrying on its business. There were disputes between the
corporate debtor and the recipient of the energy as well as the change
in supply chain management of the recipient of the energy may also
have contributed to the lack of confidence between the entities. Be that
as it may, the dispute of the corporate debtor with the Regulator or the
recipient would be extraneous to the matters involved in the company
petition. The decision in the matters pending before the Hon'ble Apex
Court and other authorities would hardly have any bearing and impact
on the issues involved in the present company petition under Section 7
of the Code.
22. This authority is required only to see whether there has been
a debt and the corporate debtor defaulted in making the
repayments. These two aspects when satisfied would trigger
corporate insolvency. Therefore, the decision of the authorities as
well as of the Hon'ble Apex Court would not affect the proceedings
before this authority one way or the other. Therefore, we are of the
considered opinion that this authority need not stay its hands from
considering the company petition as prayed for. As it is, there has
been a considerable delay in disposal of the company petition. It will
accordingly be appropriate that the company petition is disposed of
as expeditiously as possible. Hence ordered.
ORDER
The application be and the same is rejected on contest. There
would however be no order as to costs."
22. The appellant filed an appeal before NCLAT, against the aforesaid
Order dated 29-1-2021³. The said appeal has been dismissed by the
judgment and Order dated 2-3-2021 1 impugned in this appeal.
23. By the judgment and order1 impugned, NCLAT held : (Vidharbha
"9. On consideration of the issues raised in this appeal we are of
the considered opinion that the appellant has no justification in
stalling the process and seeking stay of CIRP, which in essence has
manifested in blocking the passing of order of admission of
application of the respondent under Section 7 of I&B Code. There is
no merit in appeal as we find no legal infirmity in the impugned
order. The adjudicating authority is conscious of the mandate of law
and the course it has to take as per I&B provisions, which practically
stands stalled. This is impermissible. The flow of legal process
cannot be permitted to be thwarted on considerations which are
anterior to the mandate of Sections 7(4) and (5) of the I&B Code.
The appeal being devoid of merit is dismissed. However, we do not
propose to impose any costs."
24. Mr Jaideep Gupta, Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
appellant submitted that the appellant had applied for stay of the
proceedings before NCLT, Mumbai in extraordinary circumstances,
where the appellant had not been able to pay the dues of the
respondent, only because an appeal filed by MERC, being Appeal No.
372 of 2017, against an Order dated 3-11-2016 2 passed by APTEL in
favour of the appellant, was pending in this Court. Since the aforesaid
appeal is pending in this Court, the appellant is unable to realise a sum
of Rs 1730 crores, which is due and payable to the appellant, in terms
of the order of APTEL.
25. Mr Gupta submitted that considering the special nature of the
business of the appellant of production of electricity, tariff whereof is
regulated by MERC and APTEL, the application under Section 7 IBC
should not have been admitted against the appellant.
26. Mr Gupta, referred to Section 7(5)(a) IBC which provides that
where the adjudicating authority is satisfied that a default has
occurred, and the application under sub-section (2) is complete, and
there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against the proposed
resolution professional, it may by order, admit such application.
27. Mr Gupta submitted that a bare perusal of the aforesaid
provision shows that the word used in Section 7(5)(a) IBC is "may",
which must be interpreted to say that it is not mandatory for NCLT to
admit an application in each and every case, where there is existence of
a debt.
28. Mr Gupta argued that discretion conferred by Section 7(5)(a)
IBC enables NCLT to reject an application, even if there is existence of
debt, for any reason that NCLT may deem fit, for meeting the ends of
justice and to achieve the overall objective of the IBC, which is revival
of the company and value maximisation. Mr Gupta argued that if the
legislature had intended that an application must be admitted upon
existence of a debt, then the terminology used in Section 7(5)(a) IBC
would have been "shall" and not "may".
29. Mr Gupta has also relied on Rule 11 of the National Company
Law Tribunal Rules, 2016, hereinafter referred to as "the Rules", set out
hereinbelow:
"11. Inherent Powers.-Nothing - in these rules shall be deemed
to limit or otherwise affect the inherent powers of the Tribunal to
make such orders as may be necessary for meeting the ends of
justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal."
30. Mr Gupta submitted that a conjoint reading of Section 7(5)(a)
IBC with Rule 11 of the Rules makes it abundantly clear that NCLT, on
examining the existence of debt and its default, by a corporate debtor,
has the discretion
to admit or not admit an application for initiation of CIRP. It cannot be
said that NCLT has no power, except to examine whether a debt exists
or not and accordingly accept or reject the application under Section 7
IBC.
31. To demonstrate that power under Section 7(5)(a) IBC to admit a
CIRP application is discretionary and not mandatory, an analogy of that
section has been drawn to Section 10(4) IBC, which has been held by
this Court to be discretionary and not mandatory, in Surendra Trading
Co. V. Juggilal Kamlapat Jute Mills Co. Ltd. , wherein this Court held :
"24. Further, we are of the view that the judgments cited by
NCLAT and the principle contained therein applied while deciding that
period of fourteen days within which the adjudicating authority has
to pass the order is not mandatory but directory in nature would
equally apply while interpreting the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 7, Section 9 or sub-section (4) of Section 10 as well. After
all, the applicant does not gain anything by not removing the
objections inasmuch as till the objections are removed, such an
application would not be entertained. Therefore, it is in the interest
of the applicant to remove the defects as early as possible."
32. Mr Gupta argued, and in our view rightly, that the object of the
IBC is to first try and revive the company and not to spell its death
knell. This objective cannot be lost sight of, when exercising powers
under Section 7 IBC or interpreting the said Section. Mr Gupta argued
that where there are favourable orders in favour of the corporate
debtor, implementation of which would enable the corporate debtor to
liquidate its debt, NCLT is not denuded of the power to defer the
hearing of the petition under Section 7 IBC.
33. Mr Gupta argued that the appellant is in its current situation for
no fault of its own, but due to the statutory authorities as noted by
APTEL in Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Maharashtra Electricity
Regulatory Commission2. MERC has prevented the appellant from
availing the benefit of favourable orders passed by APTEL.
34. Mr Dhruv Mehta, Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondent financial creditor, has strenuously opposed this appeal,
emphasising on the fact that the appellant corporate debtor had
admittedly defaulted in payment of its dues to the respondent financial
creditor. He submitted that the appellant being in admitted default, the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) rightly declined stay of proceedings
initiated by the respondent financial creditor under Section 7(5) IBC.
35. In support of his aforesaid submission, Mr Mehta cited Swiss
Ribbons (P) Ltd. V. Union of India4. The relevant portion of the
judgment relied upon by Mr Mehta in this context is set out
"64. The trigger for a financial creditor's application is non-
payment of dues when they arise under loan agreements. It is for
this reason that Section 433(e) of the Companies Act, 1956 has
been repealed by the Code and a change in approach has been
brought about. Legislative policy now is to move away from the
concept of "inability to pay debts" to "determination of default". The
said shift enables the financial creditor to prove, based upon solid
documentary evidence, that there was an obligation to pay the debt
and that the debtor has failed in such obligation."
36. Mr Mehta argued that Section 7(5)(a) IBC cast a mandatory
obligation on the adjudicating authority to admit an application of the
financial creditor, under Section 7(2), once it was found that a
corporate debtor had committed default in repayment of its dues to the
financial creditor. This is what the adjudicating authority (NCLT) has
done.
37. Mr Mehta argued that the application under Section 7 IBC was
filed by the respondent financial creditor before NCLT, Mumbai on 15-1-
2020. The debt due from the appellant to the respondent financial
creditor was approximately Rs 553 crores. The total debt owed by the
appellant to the consortium of lenders of which the respondent financial
creditor is the lead bank was approximately Rs 2727 crores.
38. Mr Mehta argued that the appellant corporate debtor has, on one
pretext or the other, attempted to delay the insolvency proceedings,
notwithstanding the concurrent findings of NCLT and NCLAT that
occurrence of default is not disputed. Mr Mehta submits that since the
application under Section 7 IBC had been filed in NCLT, it has been
listed on innumerable occasions, without any effective hearing.
39. Mr Mehta submitted that the application for stay filed by the
appellant was heard on 14-7-2020 and later re-heard on 29-1-2021, on
which date the application was rejected Even after the Order dated 29
-1-2021³, rejecting the appellant's application for stay, proceedings
under Section 7 IBC have not progressed at all.
40. Mr Mehta emphatically argued that the object of the IBC was to
set up an effective legal framework for resolution of insolvency and
bankruptcy in a time-bound manner, to encourage entrepreneurship
and facilitate investment for higher economic growth and development.
41. Referring to sub-section (4) of Section 7 IBC, Mr Mehta argued
that the adjudicating authority (NCLT) is mandatorily required to
ascertain existence of the default from the records of an information
utility or on the basis of other evidence furnished by the financial
creditor under sub-section (3) of Section 7, within 14 days of receipt of
an application under sub-section (2) of Section 7
IBC. If the adjudicating authority does not ascertain the existence of
default, it is bound to record its reasons in writing for not doing so.
42. Mr Mehta argued that in this case, there was no dispute that the
appellant had defaulted in payment of its dues to the respondent
financial creditor. The adjudicating authority was obliged to admit the
application under Section 7 IBC in terms of Section 7(5)(a) IBC. There
are no grounds to interfere with the concurrent findings of NCLT and
NCLAT.
43. Mr Mehta also relied on the judgment of this Court in
Innoventive Industries Ltd. V. ICICI Bank6 to argue that the object of
the IBC was to provide a framework for expeditious and time-bound
insolvency resolution. Section 7(5)(a) IBC had, therefore, necessarily to
be construed as mandatory in the light of the objects of the IBC.
44. The IBC has been enacted for reasonably expeditious, time-
bound insolvency resolution of, inter alia, corporate bodies as observed
by this Court in Swiss Ribbons4. As observed by this Court in Swiss
Ribbons4 timely resolution of a corporate debtor, who is in the red, by
an effective legal framework and process, would go a long way to
support the development of the credit market.
45. As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the IBC, and its
preamble, the objective of the IBC is to consolidate and amend the
laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate
persons, partnership firms and individuals, in a time-bound manner,
inter alia, for maximisation of the value of the assets of such persons,
promoting entrepreneurship and availability of credit, balancing the
interest of all the stakeholders and matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
46. Prior to enactment of the IBC, there was no single law in India
that dealt with insolvency and bankruptcy. Provisions relating to
insolvency and bankruptcy for companies could be found in the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985; the Recovery of
Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993; the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; and
the Companies Act, 2013. These statutes provided for creation of
multiple fora such as Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
("BIFR"), Debts Recovery Tribunal ("DRT") and National Company Law
Tribunal ("NCLT") and their respective Appellate Tribunals. Liquidation
of companies was handled by the High Courts.
47. The framework that had existed for insolvency and bankruptcy
was inadequate, ineffective and resulted in undue delay. After a lot of
deliberation and discussion and pursuant to reports of various
committees including, in particular, the Bankruptcy Law Reforms
Committee ("BLRC"), the IBC has been enacted to provide an effective
legal framework for timely resolution of insolvency and bankruptcy.
48. In Innoventive Industries Ltd. V. ICICI Bank6, this Court
speaking through Nariman, J., referred to the report of BLRC and
"16. At this stage, it is important to set out the important
paragraphs contained in the Report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms
Committee of November 2015, as these excerpts give us a good
insight into why the Code was enacted and the purpose for which it
was enacted:
India is one of the youngest republics in the world, with a high
concentration of the most dynamic entrepreneurs. Yet these game
changers and growth drivers are crippled by an environment that
takes some of the longest times and highest costs by world
standards to resolve any problems that arise while repaying dues on
debt.
*
*
*
the recovery rates obtained in India are among the lowest in
the world. When default takes place, broadly speaking, lenders seem
to recover 20% of the value of debt, on an NPV basis.
When creditors know that they have weak rights resulting in a low
recovery rate, they are averse to lend.
*
*
*
The key economic question in the bankruptcy process
When a firm (referred to as the corporate debtor in the draft law)
defaults, the question arises about what is to be done. Many
possibilities can be envisioned. One possibility is to take the firm into
liquidation. Another possibility is to negotiate a debt restructuring,
where the creditors accept a reduction of debt on an NPV basis, and
hope that the negotiated value exceeds the liquidation value.
Another possibility is to sell the firm as a going concern and use the
proceeds to pay creditors. Many hybrid structures of these broad
categories can be envisioned.
*
*
*
Speed is of essence
Speed is of essence for the working of the bankruptcy code, for
two reasons. First, while the "calm period" can help keep an
organisation afloat, without the full clarity of ownership and control,
significant decisions cannot be made. Without effective leadership,
the firm will tend to atrophy and fail. The longer the delay, the more
likely it is that liquidation will be the only answer. Second, the
liquidation value tends to go down with time as many assets suffer
from a high economic rate of depreciation.
From the viewpoint of creditors, a good realisation can generally
be obtained if the firm is sold as a going concern. Hence, when
delays induce liquidation, there is value destruction. Further, even in
liquidation, the realisation is lower when there are delays. Hence,
delays cause value destruction. Thus, achieving a high recovery rate
is primarily about identifying and combating the sources of delay.
*
*
The Committee set the following as objectives desired from
implementing a new Code to resolve insolvency and bankruptcy:
(1) Low time to resolution.
(2) Low loss in recovery.
(3) Higher levels of debt financing across a wide variety of debt
instruments.
The performance of the new Code in implementation will be based on measures of
the above outcomes.
3.4.2. Principles driving the design
The Committee chose the following principles to design the new
insolvency and bankruptcy resolution framework:
I. The Code will facilitate the assessment of viability of the
enterprise at a very early stage.
(1) The law must explicitly state that the viability of the
enterprise is a matter of business, and that matters of business
can only be negotiated between creditors and debtor. While
viability is assessed as a negotiation between creditors and
debtor, the final decision has to be an agreement among creditors
who are the financiers willing to bear the loss in the insolvency.
*
*
*
II. The Code will enable symmetry of information between
creditors and debtors.
(5) The law must ensure that information that is essential for
the insolvency and the bankruptcy resolution process is created
and available when it is required.
(6) The law must ensure that access to this information is
made available to all creditors to the enterprise, either directly or
through the regulated professional.
(7) The law must enable access to this information to third
parties who can participate in the resolution process, through the
regulated professional.
III. The Code will ensure a time-bound process to better
preserve economic value.
(8) The law must ensure that time value of money is
preserved, and that delaying tactics in these negotiations will not
extend the time set for negotiations at the start.
IV. The Code will ensure a collective process.
(9) The law must ensure that all key stakeholders will
participate to collectively assess viability.
The law must ensure that all creditors who have the capability and the willingness
to restructure their liabilities must be part of the negotiation process. The liabilities
of all creditors who are not part of the negotiation process must also be met in any
negotiated solution.
V. The Code will respect the rights of all creditors equally.
(10) The law must be impartial to the type of creditor in
counting their weight in the vote on the final solution in
resolving insolvency.
VI. The Code must ensure that, when the negotiations fail to
establish viability, the outcome of bankruptcy must be binding.
(11) The law must order the liquidation of an enterprise
which has been found unviable. This outcome of the
negotiations should be protected against all appeals other than
for very exceptional cases.'"
(emphasis in original)
49. The new Insolvency and Bankruptcy framework has been
designed, inter alia, to facilitate the assessment of viability of an
enterprise at a very early stage, and to ensure a time-bound insolvency
resolution process to preserve the economic value of the enterprise.
50. Section 6 IBC provides that where any corporate debtor commits
a default, a financial creditor, an operational creditor or the corporate
debtor itself may initiate the CIRP in respect of such corporate debtor.
51. Under Section 7(1) IBC, a financial creditor may, either by itself,
or jointly with other financial creditors, file an application for initiating
CIRP against a corporate debtor. before the adjudicating authority
(NCLT) when a default has occurred. Default includes a default in
respect of a financial debt owed not only by the applicant financial
creditor but to any other financial creditor of the corporate debtor.
52. Under Section 7(2) IBC, a financial creditor is required to make
an application in the prescribed form and manner, along with the
prescribed fee. Along with an application, the financial creditor is
required to furnish record of the defaults recorded with the information
utility or such other record or evidence of default as may be specified,
the name of the resolution professional proposed to act as an interim
resolution professional and any other information as may be specified
by the Board.
53. From a perusal of the application filed by the respondent
financial creditor under Section 7(2) IBC in the statutory form, a copy
whereof is included in the paper book, it is apparent that the
respondent financial creditor filed the application in NCLT for initiation
of CIRP against the appellant in its individual capacity and not as lead
bank on behalf of the other creditors. The respondent financial creditor
claimed that a total amount of Rs 553,27,99,322.78 was due from the
appellant corporate debtor to the respondent financial creditor, of which
Rs 42,83,45,538.32 was on account of the interest and further Rs
11,21,68,673.81 towards penal interest. The principal outstanding
amount was Rs 499,22,85,110.65.
54. When an application is filed under Section 7(2) IBC, the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) is required to ascertain the existence of a
default from the records of the information utility or any other evidence
furnished by the financial creditor under sub-section (3) of Section 7
IBC, within 14 days of the date of receipt of the application,
55. Section 7(5)(a) IBC, on which much emphasis has been placed
both by Mr Gupta and Mr Mehta, provides that where the adjudicating
authority (NCLT) is satisfied that a default has occurred and the
application under
sub-section (2) IBC is complete and there is no disciplinary proceeding
against the proposed resolution professional, it may by order, admit
such application. If default has not occurred, or the application is
incomplete, or any disciplinary proceeding is pending against the
proposed resolution professional, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) may
reject such application in terms of Section 7(5)(a) IBC, but after giving
the applicant opportunity to rectify the defect.
56. Both, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) and the Appellate
Tribunal (NCLAT) proceeded on the premises that an application must
necessarily be entertained under Section 7(5)(a) IBC, if a debt existed
and the corporate debtor was in default of payment of debt. In other
words, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) found Section 7(5)(a) IBC to
be mandatory. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) was of the view that
Section 7(5)(a) did not admit any other interpretation, with which the
Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) agreed.
57. The Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) affirmed the finding of the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) that the adjudicating authority was only
required to see whether there had been a debt, and the corporate
debtor had defaulted in making the repayments. These two aspects,
when satisfied, would trigger corporate insolvency. Since the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) did not consider the merits of the
contention of the respondent corporate debtor, the only question in this
appeal is, whether Section 7(5)(a) is a mandatory or a discretionary
provision. In other words, is the expression "may" to be construed as
"shall", having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.
58. Referring to the judgment of this Court in Swiss Ribbons4, the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) held that the imperativeness of timely
resolution of a corporate debtor, who was in the red, indicated that no
other extraneous matter should come in the way of expeditiously
deciding a petition under Section 7 or under Section 9 IBC.
59. There can be no doubt that a corporate debtor who is in the red
should be resolved expeditiously, following the timelines in the IBC. No
extraneous matter should come in the way. However, the viability and
overall financial health of the corporate debtor are not extraneous
matters.
60. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) found the dispute of the
corporate debtor with the electricity regulator or the recipient of
electricity would be extraneous to the matters involved in the petition.
Disputes with the electricity regulator or the recipient of electricity may
not be of much relevance. The question is whether an award of APTEL in
favour of the corporate debtor, can completely be disregarded by the
adjudicating authority (NCLT), when it is claimed that, in terms of the
award, a sum of Rs 1730 crores, that is, an amount far exceeding the
claim of the financial creditor, is realisable by the corporate debtor. The
answer, in our view, is necessarily in the negative.
61. In our view, the Appellate Authority (NCLAT) erred in holding
that the adjudicating authority (NCLT) was only required to see whether
there had been a debt and the corporate debtor had defaulted in
making repayment of the debt,
and that these two aspects, if satisfied, would trigger the CIRP. The
existence of a financial debt and default in payment thereof only gave
the financial creditor the right to apply for initiation of CIRP. The
adjudicating authority (NCLT) was required to apply its mind to
relevant factors including the feasibility of initiation of CIRP, against an
electricity generating company operated under statutory control, the
impact of MERC's appeal, pending in this Court, order of APTEL referred
to above and the overall financial health and viability of the corporate
debtor under its existing management.
62. As pointed out by Mr Gupta, legislature has, in its wisdom,
chosen to use the expression "may" in Section 7(5)(a) IBC. When an
adjudicating authority (NCLT) is satisfied that a default has occurred
and the application of a financial creditor is complete and there are no
disciplinary proceedings against proposed resolution professional, it
may by order admit the application. Legislative intent is construed in
accordance with the language used in the statute.
The meaning and intention of Section 7(5)(a) IBC is to be
ascertained from the phraseology of the provision in the context of the
nature and design of the IBC. This Court would have to consider the
effect of the provision being construed as directory or discretionary.
64. Ordinarily the word "may" is directory. The expression "may
admit" confers discretion to admit. In contrast, the use of the word
"shall" postulates a mandatory requirement. The use of the word "shall"
raises a presumption that a provision is imperative. However, it is well
settled that the prima facie presumption about the provision being
imperative may be rebutted by other considerations such as the scope
of the enactment and the consequences flowing from the construction.
65. It is well settled that the first and foremost principle of
interpretation of a statute is the rule of literal interpretation, as held by
this Court in Lalita Kumari V. State of U.P. 7 If Section 7(5)(a) IBC is
construed literally the provision must be held to confer a discretion on
the adjudicating authority (NCLT).
224, para 22)
"22.
In construing a statutory provision, the first and the
foremost rule of construction is the literary construction. All that we
have to see at the very outset is what does that provision say? If the
provision is unambiguous and if from that provision, the legislative
intent is clear, we need not call into aid the other rules of
construction of statutes. The other rules of construction of statutes
are called into aid only when the legislative intention is not clear."
270, para 9)
"9. It may be mentioned in this connection that the first and
foremost principle of interpretation of a statute in every system of
interpretation is the literal rule of interpretation. The other rules of
interpretation e.g. the mischief rule, purposive interpretation, etc.
can only be resorted to when the plain words of a statute are
ambiguous or lead to no intelligible results or if read literally would
nullify the very object of the statute. Where the words of a statute
are absolutely clear and unambiguous, recourse cannot be had to the
principles of interpretation other than the literal rule, vide Swedish
Match AB V. SEBI ¹. "
68. In Lalita Kumari V. State of U.P. 7, this Court construed the use of
the word "shall" in Section 154(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and held that Section 154(1) postulates the mandatory
registration of an FIR on receipt of information of a cognizable offence.
If, however, the information given does not disclose a cognizance
offence, a preliminary enquiry may be ordered, and if the enquiry
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR must be
registered.
69. As argued by Mr Gupta, had it been the legislative intent that
Section 7(5)(a) IBC should be a mandatory provision, legislature would
have used the word "shall" and not the word "may". There is no
ambiguity in Section 7(5)(a) IBC. Purposive interpretation can only be
resorted to when the plain words of a statute are ambiguous or if
construed literally, the provision would nullify the object of the statute
or otherwise lead to an absurd result. In this case, there is no cogent
reason to depart from the rule of literal construction.
70. Section 8 IBC relates to the initiation of CIRP by an operational
creditor. There are noticeable differences between the procedure by
which a financial creditor may initiate CIRP and the procedure by which
an operational creditor may apply for CIRP.
71. The operational creditor is, on occurrence of a default, required
to serve on the corporate debtor, a demand notice of the unpaid
operational debt, or a copy of an invoice demanding payment of the
amount involved in the default of the corporate debtor. Within ten days
of receipt of the demand notice or copy of the invoice, the corporate
debtor may respond by drawing the notice of the operational creditor to
the existence of a dispute, in relation to the claim or to the payment of
the unpaid operational debt.
72. Section 9 prescribes the mode and manner by which an
operational creditor can make an application for initiation of CIRP. After
expiry of ten days from the date of delivery of the notice or invoice
demanding payment, if the operational creditor does not receive
payment from the corporate debtor or
notice of dispute, the operational creditor may file an application before
the adjudicating authority (NCLT) for initiation of CIRP.
73. Sub-section (5) of Section 9 IBC reads:
"9. (5) The adjudicating authority shall, within fourteen days of
the receipt of the application under sub-section (2), by an order-
(i) admit the application and communicate such decision to the
operational creditor and the corporate debtor if,
(a) the application made under sub-section (2) is complete;
(b) there is no payment of the unpaid operational debt;
(c) the invoice or notice for payment to the corporate debtor
has been delivered by the operational creditor;
(d) no notice of dispute has been received by the operational
creditor or there is no record of dispute in the information
utility; and
(e) there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against any
resolution professional proposed under sub-section (4), if any.
(ii) reject the application and communicate such decision to
the operational creditor and the corporate debtor, if-
(a) the application made under sub-section (2) is
incomplete;
(b) there has been payment of the unpaid operational debt;
(c) the creditor has not delivered the invoice or notice for
payment to the corporate debtor;
(d) notice of dispute has been received by the operational
creditor or there is a record of dispute in the information utility;
or
(e) any disciplinary proceeding is pending against any
proposed resolution professional:
Provided that adjudicating authority, shall before rejecting an
application under sub-clause (a) of clause (ii) give a notice to the
applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven days of
the date of receipt of such notice from the adjudicating authority."
74. Sub-section (5) of Section 9 IBC provides that the adjudicating
authority (NCLT) shall, within 14 days of the receipt of an application of
an operational creditor under sub-section (2) of Section 9, admit the
application and communicate the decision to the operational creditor
and the corporate debtor, provided, the conditions stipulated in clauses
(a) to (e) of Section 9(5)(i) IBC are satisfied. The adjudicating
authority (NCLT) must reject the application of the operational creditor
in the circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (e) of Section 9(5)(ii)
IBC.
75. Significantly, the legislature has in its wisdom used the word
"may" in Section 7(5)(a) IBC in respect of an application for CIRP
initiated by a financial creditor against a corporate debtor but has used
the expression "shall" in the otherwise almost identical provision of
Section 9(5) IBC relating to the initiation of CIRP by an operational
creditor.
76. The fact that the legislature used "may" in Section 7(5)(a) IBC
but a different word, that is, "shall" in the otherwise almost identical
provision of Section 9(5)(a) shows that "may" and "shall" in the two
provisions are intended to convey a different meaning. It is apparent
that the legislature intended Section 9(5)(a) IBC to be mandatory and
Section 7(5)(a) IBC to be discretionary. An application of an operational
creditor for initiation of CIRP under Section 9(2) IBC is mandatorily
required to be admitted if the application is complete in all respects
and in compliance of the requisites of the IBC and the rules and
regulations thereunder, there is no payment of the unpaid operational
debt, if notices for payment or the invoice have been delivered to the
corporate debtor by the operational creditor and no notice of dispute
has been received by the operational creditor. The IBC does not
countenance dishonesty or deliberate failure to repay the dues of an
operational creditor.
77. On the other hand, in the case of an application by a financial
creditor who might even initiate proceedings in a representative
capacity on behalf of all financial creditors, the adjudicating authority
might examine the expedience of initiation of CIRP, taking into account
all relevant facts and circumstances, including the overall financial
health and viability of the corporate debtor. The adjudicating authority
may in its discretion not admit the application of a financial creditor.
78. The legislature has consciously differentiated between financial
creditors and operational creditors, as there is an innate difference
between financial creditors, in the business of investment and
financing, and operational creditors in the business of supply of goods
and services. Financial credit is usually secured and of much longer
duration. Such credits, which are often long term credits, on which the
operation of the corporate debtor depends, cannot be equated to
operational debts which are usually unsecured, of a shorter duration
and of lesser amount. The financial strength and nature of business of a
financial creditor cannot be compared with that of an operational
creditor, engaged in supply of goods and services. The impact of the
non-payment of admitted dues could be far more serious on an
operational creditor than on a financial creditor.
79. As observed above, the financial strength and nature of business
of financial creditors and operational creditors being different, as also
the tenor and terms of agreements/contracts with financial creditors
and operational creditors, the provisions in the IBC relating to
commencement of CIRP at the behest of an operational creditor, whose
dues are undisputed, are rigid and inflexible. If dues are admitted as
against the operational creditor, the corporate debtor must pay the
same. If it does not, CIRP must be commenced. In the case of a
financial debt, there is a little more flexibility. The adjudicating
authority (NCLT) has been conferred the discretion to admit the
application of the financial creditor. If facts and circumstances so
warrant, the adjudicating authority can keep the admission in abeyance
or even reject the application. Of course, in case of rejection of an
application, the financial creditor is not denuded of the right to apply
afresh for initiation of CIRP, if its dues continue to remain unpaid.
80. The IBC, as observed above, is intended to consolidate and
amend the laws with a view to reorganise corporate debtors and resolve
insolvency in a time-bound manner for maximisation of the value of the
assets of the corporate debtor.
81. The title "Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code" makes it amply clear
that the statute deals with and/or tackles insolvency and bankruptcy. It
is certainly not the object of the IBC to penalise solvent companies,
temporarily defaulting in repayment of its financial debts, by initiation
of CIRP. Section 7(5)(a) IBC, therefore, confers discretionary power on
the adjudicating authority (NCLT) to admit an application of a financial
creditor under Section 7 IBC for initiation of CIRP.
82. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) failed to appreciate that the
question of time-bound initiation and completion of CIRP could only
arise if the companies were bankrupt or insolvent and not otherwise.
Moreover the timeline starts ticking only from the date of admission of
the application for initiation of CIRP and not from the date of filing the
same.
83. In Swiss Ribbons4 this Court considering the vires of the IBC
"43. A financial creditor may trigger the Code either by itself or
jointly with other financial creditors or such persons as may be
notified by the Central Government when a "default" occurs. The
Explanation to Section 7(1) also makes it clear that the Code may be
triggered by such persons in respect of a default made to any other
financial creditor of the corporate debtor, making it clear that once
triggered, the resolution process under the Code is a collective
proceeding in rem which seeks, in the first instance, to rehabilitate
the corporate debtor. Under Section 7(4), the adjudicating authority
shall, within the prescribed period, ascertain the existence of a
default on the basis of evidence furnished by the financial creditor;
and under Section 7(5), the adjudicating authority has to be
satisfied that a default has occurred, when it may, by order, admit
the application, or dismiss the application if such default has not
occurred. On the other hand, under Sections 8 and 9, an operational
creditor may, on the occurrence of a default, deliver a demand notice
which must then be replied to within the specified period. What is
important is that at this stage, if an application is filed before the
adjudicating authority for initiating the corporate insolvency
resolution process, the corporate debtor can prove that the debt is
disputed. When the debt is so disputed, such application would be
rejected."
84. The judgment of this Court in Swiss Ribbons4, which was
rendered in the context of a challenge to the vires of the IBC, does not
consider the question of whether Section 7(5)(a) IBC is mandatory or
discretionary. It is well settled that a judgment is a precedent for the
question of law that is raised and decided. The language used in a
judgment cannot be read like a statute. In any case, words and phrases
in the judgment cannot be construed in a truncated manner out of
context.
85. The legislature has, in its wisdom made a distinction between
the date of filing an application under Section 7 IBC and, the date of
admission of such application for the purpose of computation of
timelines. CIRP commences on the date of admission of the application
for initiation of CIRP and not the date of filing thereof. There is no fixed
time-limit within which an application under Section 7 IBC has to be
admitted.
86. Even though Section 7(5)(a) IBC may confer discretionary power
on the adjudicating authority, such discretionary power cannot be
exercised arbitrarily or capriciously. If the facts and circumstances
warrant exercise of discretion in a particular manner, discretion would
have to be exercised in that manner.
87. Ordinarily, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) would have to
exercise its discretion to admit an application under Section 7 IBC and
initiate CIRP on satisfaction of the existence of a financial debt and
default on the part of the corporate debtor in payment of the debt,
unless there are good reasons not to admit the petition.
88. The adjudicating authority (NCLT) has to consider the grounds
made out by the corporate debtor against admission, on its own merits.
For example, when admission is opposed on the ground of existence of
an award or a decree in favour of the corporate debtor, and the
awarded/decretal amount exceeds the amount of the debt, the
adjudicating authority would have to exercise its discretion under
Section 7(5)(a) IBC to keep the admission of the application of the
financial creditor in abeyance, unless there is good reason not to do so.
The adjudicating authority may, for example, admit the application of
the financial creditor, notwithstanding any award or decree, if the
award/decretal amount is incapable of realisation. The example is only
illustrative.
89. In this case, the adjudicating authority (NCLT) has simply
brushed aside the case of the appellant that an amount of Rs 1730
crores was realisable by the appellant in terms of the order passed by
APTEL in favour of the appellant, with the cursory observation that
disputes if any between the appellant and the recipient of electricity or
between the appellant and the Electricity Regulatory Commission were
inconsequential.
90. We are clearly of the view that the adjudicating authority (NCLT)
as also the Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) fell in error in holding that once
it was found that a debt existed and a corporate debtor was in default
in payment of the debt there would be no option to the adjudicating
authority (NCLT) but to admit the petition under Section 7 IBC.
91. For the reasons discussed above, the appeal is allowed. The
impugned Order dated 29-1-2021 passed by the adjudicating
authority (NCLT) and the impugned Order dated 2-3-2021¹ passed by
the Appellate Authority (NCLAT) dismissing the appeal of the appellant
are set aside. NCLT shall reconsider the application of the appellant for
stay of further proceedings on merits in accordance with law.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Vidharbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.,
(AT) (Insolvency) No. 117 of 2021, dt. 2-3-2021] [Reversed]
1
2
Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission, 2016
3
4
5
4
7
8
9
10
7