In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE S. ABDUL NAZEER AND KRISHNA MURARI, JJ.)
ARUNACHALA
GOUNDER
(DEAD)
BY
LEGAL
REPRESENTATIVES
Appellants;
Versus
PONNUSAMY AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 6659 of 2011-, decided on January 20, 2022
A. Family and Personal Laws - Hindu Law - Succession and Inheritance
- Hindu Women, Rights of - Right of widow and daughter to inherit self-
acquired property, or, share obtained in partition of coparcenary/family
property of husband/father, prior to commencement of the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956 - Law extensively surveyed and clarified
- Right of widow or daughter to inherit the self-acquired property, or,
share received in partition of coparcenary/family property of Hindu male
dying intestate, held, is well recognised not only under the old customary
Hindu Law but also by various judicial pronouncements - Therefore, if
property of male Hindu dying intestate is self-acquired property, or,
obtained in partition of coparcenary/family property, held, the same would
devolve by inheritance and not by survivorship, and daughter of such male
Hindu would be entitled to inherit such property in preference to other
collaterals
- Thus held, K the daugher of M being his sole surviving heir, inherited
the self-acquired property of M, when M died before the commencement of
the 1956 Act - The said property, held, did not devolve upon M's brother's
son by survivorship
- Alienation/Disposition by will/Devolution of self-acquired property
B. Family and Personal Laws - Hindu Succession Act, 1956 - S. 15(2)
-
Basic aim of legislature in enacting S. 15(2), held, is to ensure that inherited
property of a female Hindu dying issueless and intestate, goes back to the
source
C. Family and Personal Laws - Hindu Succession Act, 1956 - Ss. 15,
8,
Class I and Class II Entries IV (1) & (3) - Female Hindu dying intestate
and issueless after commencement of the 1956 Act - Persons entitled to
succeed to property of such female Hindu, where such property is inherited
from her father - As per scheme of S. 15(2)(a) if a female Hindu dies
intestate without leaving any issue, then property inherited by her from her
father or mother would go to heirs of her father
- After death of M, his property was inherited by his sole heir,
his daughter K (see Shortnote A) - Upon death of K in 1967, held, as per S.
15(2)(a) of the 1956 Act, the property of K inherited from her father M
would devolve upon the heirs of M
- In the present case, only heirs of M alive at that time of K's death
were the five children of R the brother of M (as the said children were Class
II heirs of M) - T, the plaintiff herein being one of the said five children of R,
thus held, was entitled to inherit a proportionate share in the property
inherited by K from her father M - Thus, held, trial court should have
decreed partition suit of T
D. Civil Procedure Code, 1908 - Or. 14 and Rr. 1(5) & (6) - Framing of
issues - When required - Admission by a party - Defendant made
admission in his written statement that suit property was exclusively
purchased by M - Held, there was no need to frame issue whether suit
properties are absolute properties of M - Evidence Act, 1872, S. 58
Suit for partition was filed by T, daughter of R, claiming 1/5th share in the suit
property on the allegations that the plaintiff is one of 5 children including Defendants
5 and 6, of R. The said R had an elder brother by the name of M. It was alleged by
the appellant-plaintiff that R, predeceased his brother M; and that M died on 14-4-
1957 leaving behind the sole daughter K who also died issueless in 1967. Further
case set up by the appellant-plaintiff was that after the death of M, his property was
inherited by K and upon her death in 1967, all the five children of R, including T the
plaintiff, are heirs in equal of K and entitled to 1/5th share each.
Defence set up by the respondent-defendants was that M died on 11-5-1949
and not on 14-4-1957 as alleged by the appellant-plaintiff and as per the provisions
of the Hindu Law prevailing prior to 1956, G (son of T) was the sole heir of M and
accordingly, he inherited the suit properties and was in possession and enjoyment
of these properties and after his death the respondents in present appeal, were
continuing as lawful owners.
It was an undisputed fact between the parties that the property in question i.e.
the suit property was independently purchased by M in the year 1938 through the
process of a court-auction and thus, it was his independent property. However,
there was an issue between the parties in respect of the date of death of M. The
appellant-plaintiff asserted the date of death as 14-4-1957, whereas the
respondent-defendant pleaded the date of death as 15-4-1949.
The trial court after considering the evidence brought on record of the case by
the parties concluded that M died on 15-4-1949 and thus, the suit property would
devolve upon the sole son of deceased R, the deceased brother of M by
survivorship and the appellant-plaintiff had no right to file the suit for partition and,
accordingly, dismissed the suit.
Findings recorded by the trial court particularly in respect of the date of death of
M in 1949 was confirmed by the High Court in the first appeal and the decree
dismissing the suit for partition was affirmed holding that the property would
devolve upon the defendant by way of survivorship.
The issues for determination before the Supreme Court were:
(i) Whether daughters of Hindu male dying intestate, would be entitled to inherit
self-acquired and other properties obtained in partition by father and get preference
over other collateral members of family or not?
(ii) Whether when succession of suit properties opened in 1967 upon death of
sole daughter, the 1956 Act will be applicable and thereby father's brother's
daughters being Class I heirs of their father, would be entitled to share in suit
properties?
Allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court
Held :
Insofar as, the date of death of M being 15-4-1949, it is a finding of fact
affirmed by the two fact-finding courts based on appreciation of material evidence
existing on the record of the case and is not liable to be interfered with and the
Supreme Court proceeded to decide the issue between the parties taking the date
of death of M as 15-4-1949.
(Para 15)
Other aspect of the matter is whether the suit property was exclusively
purchased by M in the court-auction and was his separate property or it was
purchased out of the joint family fund making it a joint family property. It is correct
that neither was any issue framed by the trial court in this regard nor was any
evidence led by the parties nor any finding has been returned. However, in view of
the admission made by the defendant in the written statement that suit properties
are absolute properties of M, he having purchased the same in a court-auction sale
on 19-9-1938, there was hardly any necessity to frame any issue in this regard,
once the fact was admitted in written statement.
(Para 16)
In ancient texts daughter was in fact capable of inheriting the father's separate
estate.
(Paras 23 to 51)
Pranjivandas Tulsidas V. Devkuvarbai, (1859) 1 Bom HC 130; Tuljaram Morarji V.
Ramji, (1869) 6 Bom HC Rep (OC) 1, held, approved
Moo IA 543, cited
A Treatise on the Hindoo Law of Inheritance by Standish Grove Grady published in
1868 by Gantz Brother Mount Road, Madras; Vyavastha-Chandrika : A Digest of
Hindu Law by Shyama Charan Sarkar, Vidya Bhushan printed in 1878 by I.C. Bose
& Co., Stanhope Press 249, Bow-Bazar, Calcutta; Hindu Law and Judicature from
the Dharma-Sastra of Yajnavalkya published in 1859; A Digest of Hindu Law As
administered in the Courts of The Madras Presidency, published in 1877 by
Higginbotham & Co., Madras; Hindu Law by Mulla (22nd Edn.), referred to
Ancient texts as also the Smritis, the commentaries written by various
renowned persons, and even judicial pronouncements have recognised the rights of
several female heirs, the wives and the daughters being the foremost of them.
(Paras 52 to 66)
in the case of Hindu male dying intestate is to be governed by inheritance rather
than survivorship, is reaffirmed. In the absence of male member, the property
devolves upon widow and thereafter to daughter.
(Para 57)
(1878) 1 Mad 312; Gopal Singh V. Ujagar Singh, AIR 1954 SC 579, followed
Mulla's Principles of Hindu Law (14th Edn.), referred to
Rights of women in the family to maintenance were very substantial rights and
on the whole, it would seem that some of the commentators erred in drawing
adverse inferences from the vague references to women's succession in the earlier
Smritis. The views of the Mitakshara on the matter are unmistakable. Vijneshwara
also nowhere endorses the view that women are incompetent to inherit.
(Para 67)
Right of a widow or daughter to inherit the self-acquired property or share
received in partition of a coparcenary property of a Hindu male dying intestate is
well recognised not only under the old customary Hindu Law but also by various
judicial pronouncements. Therefore, if a property of a male Hindu dying intestate is
a self-acquired property or obtained in partition of a coparcenary or a family
property, the same would devolve by inheritance and not by survivorship, and a
daughter of such a male Hindu would be entitled to inherit such property in
preference to other collaterals.
(Para 68)
In the present case since the property in question was admittedly the self-
acquired property of M, despite the family being in state of jointness upon his death
intestate, his sole surviving daughter K, will inherit the same by inheritance and the
property shall not devolve by survivorship.
(Para 69)
Section 14(1) of the 1956 Act converted all limited estates owned by women
into absolute estates and the succession of these properties in the absence of a will
or testament would take place in consonance with Section 15 of the 1956 Act.
(Para 74)
The scheme of sub-section (1) of Section 15 of the 1956 Act goes to show that
property of Hindu females dying intestate is to devolve on her own heirs, the list
whereof is enumerated in clauses (a) to (e) of Section 15(1) of the 1956 Act. Sub-
section (2) of Section 15 of the 1956 Act carves out exceptions only with regard to
property acquired through inheritance and further, the exception is confined to the
property inherited by a Hindu female either from her father or mother, or from her
husband, or from her father-in-law. The exceptions carved out by sub-section (2)
shall operate only in the event of the Hindu female dies without leaving any direct
heirs i.e. her son or daughter or children of the pre-deceased son or daughter.
(Para 75)
Thus, if a female Hindu dies intestate without leaving any issue, then the
property inherited by her from her father or mother would go to the heirs of her
father whereas the property inherited from her husband or father-in-law would go
to the heirs of the husband.
(Para 76)
Basic aim of the legislature in enacting Section 15(2) of the 1956 Act is to
ensure that inherited property of a female Hindu dying issueless and intestate, goes
back to the source.
(Para 77)
Section 15(1)(d) read with Section 15(2)(a) of the 1956 Act provides that
failing all heirs of the female specified in Sections 15(1)(a) to (c), but not until then,
all her property howsoever acquired will devolve upon the heirs of the father. The
devolution upon the heirs of the father shall be in the same order and according to
the same rules as would have applied if the property had belonged to the father and
he had died intestate in respect thereof immediately after her death. In the present
case since the succession of the suit properties opened in 1967 upon death of K,
the 1956 Act shall apply and thereby R's daughters being Class I heirs of their father
too shall be heirs and entitled to 1/5th share each in the suit properties.
(Para 78)
In the present case, since the succession of the suit properties opened in 1967
upon death of K, the 1956 Act shall apply and thereby R's daughters being Class I
heirs of their father too shall also be heirs and entitled to 1/5th share in each of the
suit properties.
(Paras 79 to 81)
[Ed. : Brother's children of a male Hindu are given as Class II heirs under Entries IV (1) and (3):
"IV. (1) Brother's son. (3) brother's daughter.
"]
RM-D/68465/SV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
P.V. Yogeswaran (Advocate-on-Record), Ashish Kr. Upadhyay,
Jaiyesh Bakhshi, Y. Lokesh, V. Sibi Kargil, Ms V. Keerthana and
Anubhav Chaturvedi, Advocates, for the Appellants;
K.K. Mani (Advocate-on-Record) and Ms T. Archana, Advocates, for
the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Ponnusamy (reversed)
525b-c, 548e
Devidas V. Vithabai
542f-g
548a-b, 548b
Balwant Singh
547c-d, 548b
547g
Ghurpatari V. Sampati
541d
7. AIR 1954 SC 579, Gopal Singh V. Ujagar Singh
542e
168, Lal Singh V. Roor Singh
542d-e
Tuljaram Morarji V. Mathuradas
530d
Sivagnanan Tevar V. Pariasami
541a
Lall
530e-f
12. (1869) 6 Bom HC Rep (OC) 1, Bhaskar Trimbak
Acharya V. Mahadev Ramji
530f
543, Katama Natchier V. Rajah of Shivagunga
540d, 541a, 541b-c,
541c-d
14. (1859) 1 Bom HC 130, Pranjivandas Tulsidas V. 530b-c, 530d-e, 530e-f,
Devkuvarbai
530f-g, 531a
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA MURARI, J. Challenge has been laid in this civil appeal to
the judgment and order dated 21-1-20091 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras (hereinafter referred to as "the High Court")
dismissing a regular first appeal being AS No. 351 of 1994 filed under
Section 96 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, challenging the judgment
and decree dated 1-3-1994 rendered by the trial court dismissing
Original Suit No. 295 of 1991 for partition filed by the appellant herein,
claiming 1/5th share in the suit properties.
2. The following genealogy of the parties is necessary to be taken
note of for appreciating their claims and contentions:
Gurunatha Gounder
Marappa Gounder (Son)
Ramasamy Gounder (Son)
(Died on 11-5-1949)
(Predeceased his brother
Marappa Gounder)
Kupayee Ammal (Daughter)
(Died issueless in 1967)
Gurunatha
Thangammal
Ramayeeammal
Elayammal
Nallammal
Gounder
(Daughter)
(Deceased
(Daughter)
(Daughter)
(Son)
(Plaintiff in the
Daughter)
(Defendant 5
(Defendant 6
suit since deceased)
in the suit)
in the suit)
1. Ponnuswamy
2. G. Thangammal
Arunachala Gounder
3. Papayee
(Deceased, represented by LRs)
1. Samathuvam
4. Kannammal
1. Venkatachalam
2. Kannayan
(Defendants 1 to 4)
2. A. Mottaiyappan
(Defendants 8
(Since deceased represented
& 9 in the suit)
by Appellants 1 & 2 herein)
3. Suit for partition was filed by Thangammal, daughter of
Ramasamy Gounder, claiming 1/5th share in the suit property on the
allegations that the plaintiff and Defendants 5 and 6, namely,
Elayammal and Nallammal and one Ramayeeammal are sisters of
Gurunatha Gounder, all the five of them being the children of
Ramasamy Gounder. The said Ramasamy Gounder had an elder brother
by the name of Marappa Gounder. Ramasamy Gounder, predeceased
his brother Marappa Gounder who died on 14-4-1957 leaving behind
the sole daughter by the name of Kuppayee Ammal who also died
issueless in 1967. Further case set up by the appellant-plaintiff was
that after the death of Marappa Gounder, his property was inherited by
Kuppayee Ammal and upon her death in 1967, all the five children of
Ramasamy Gounder, namely, Gurunatha Gounder, Thangammal
(original the plaintiff now represented by legal heir), Ramayeeammal,
Elayammal and Nallammal are heirs in equal of Kuppayee and entitled
to 1/5th share each.
4. Gurunatha Gounder, died leaving behind Defendants 1 to 4
(respondents herein) as heirs and legal representatives.
Ramayeeammal died leaving behind Defendants 7 to 9. The appellant-
plaintiff, Thangammal, died leaving behind, Appellants 1, 3 and 4
herein and Appellant 1, Arunachala Gounder, since having died is
represented by her legal representatives Appellant 1, Venkatachalam
and Appellant 2, A. Mottaiyappan.
5. The defence set up by the respondent-defendants was that
Marappa Gounder died on 11-5-1949 and not on 14-4-1957 as alleged
by the appellant-plaintiff and as per the provisions of the Hindu Law
prevailing prior to 1956, Gurunatha Gounder was the sole heir of
Marappa Gounder and accordingly, he inherited the suit properties and
was in possession and enjoyment of these properties and after his
death the respondents herein, were continuing as lawful owners.
6. It is an undisputed fact between the parties that the property in
question i.e. the suit property, was independently purchased by
Marappa Gounder in the year 1938 through the process of a court-
auction and thus, it was his independent property. However, there was
an issue between the parties in respect of the date of death of Marappa
Gounder. The appellant-plaintiff asserted the date of death as 14-4-
1957, whereas the respondent-defendant pleaded the date of death as
15-4-1949.
7. The trial court after considering the evidence brought on record of
the case by the parties concluded that Marappa Gounder died on 15-4-
1949 and thus, the suit property would devolve upon the sole son of
deceased Ramasamy Gounder, the deceased brother of Marappa
Gounder by survivorship and the appellant-plaintiff had no right to file
the suit for partition and, accordingly, dismissed the suit.
8. The findings recorded by the trial court particularly in respect of
the date of death of Marappa Gounder in 1949 was confirmed by the
High Court in the first appeal and the decree dismissing the suit for
partition was affirmed holding that the property would devolve upon
the defendant by way of survivorship.
9. We have heard Shri P.V. Yogeswaran, learned counsel for the
appellant and Shri K.K. Mani, learned counsel for the respondents.
Arguments on behalf of appellants
10. Shri P.V. Yogeswaran, learned counsel for the appellant submits
that since the property was purchased through court auction-sale by
Marappa Gounder on 15-12-1938, hence, it is his independent property
and it was never considered as a joint family property, as such on death
of Marappa Gounder, this property would devolve by succession upon
his daughter, Kupayee Ammal, who died in the year 1967. He further
submitted that under the law of Mitakshara, the right to inheritance
depends upon propinquity i.e. proximity of relationship. Since, the
daughter has closer proximity of relationship, she would inherit the
property from the father instead of the father's brother's son and
daughter.
11. He further points out that there are three classes of heirs
recognised by Mitakshara, namely, (a) Gotrajasapindas, (b)
Samanodakas and (c) Bandhus. The first class succeeds before the
second and the second succeeds before the third. To support the
contentions, he made a reference to Mulla-Hindu Law 23rd Edn. He also
submitted that under the Hindu Law, a daughter is not disqualified to
inherit in separate property of her father and when a male Hindu dies
without a son leaving only daughter, his separate property would
devolve upon the daughter through succession and the property will not
devolve upon brother's son through survivorship and the courts below
have wrongly applied the principles of Hindu Law and dismissed the
suit. In support of his contention, he cited references from various
commentaries which we shall deal with at appropriate place.
Arguments on behalf of respondents
12. Shri K.K. Mani, learned counsel representing the respondents
submitted that the property in question was purchased by Marappa
Gounder in court auction-sale out of the family funds and thus, it was a
joint property, and on his death, since he had no male heir, the
defendant as a coparcener succeeded to the estate. He further
submitted that the trial court after scrutinising the evidence brought on
record by the parties came to the conclusion that the paternal uncle of
the plaintiff, Marappa Gounder, died prior to the enforcement of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and, therefore, the plaintiff and other
sisters of the plaintiff were not the heirs as on the date of death of
Marappa Gounder in the year 1949 and thus, the plaintiff was not
entitled to the partition of 1/5th share in the suit properties, and thus,
the suit was rightly dismissed.
13. Shri K.K. Mani, learned counsel further submits that when the
date of death of Marappa Gounder, was confirmed to be in the year
1949, the succession to his properties would open in the year 1949
when Kupayee Ammal, the daughter of Marappa Gounder, was not
having anv right to inherit the propertv left bv her deceased father. The
only heir available at the time of death of Marappa Gounder was
Guranatha Gounder, the son of Ramasamy Gounder, who was none
other than the father of Defendants 1 to 4. Once the
properties of Marappa Gounder devolved upon Guranatha Gounder, it
became his property and, therefore, it could not be made the subject-
matter of the partition after the promulgation of the Hindu Succession
Act, 1956. He also submitted that neither any issue was framed nor any
evidence was led by the appellant-plaintiff throughout the entire
proceedings to establish that property purchased in the court-auction in
the year 1938 was a self-acquired property of Marappa Gounder and
thus, it would be presumed that it was a joint family property leaving
no rights in his daughter to inherit the same.
14. We have considered the arguments advanced by the learned
counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the record of
the case and the various texts and commentaries pertaining to Hindu
Law.
15. Insofar as, the date of death of Marappa Gounder being 15-4-
1949, it is a finding of fact affirmed by the two fact-finding courts
based on appreciation of material evidence existing on the record of the
case and is not liable to be interfered with and we proceed to decide
the issue between the parties taking the date of death of Marappa
Gounder as 15-4-1949.
16. The other aspect of the matter is whether the suit property was
exclusively purchased by Marappa Gounder in the court-auction and
was his separate property or it was purchased out of the joint family
fund making it a joint family property. It is correct that neither any
issue was framed by the trial court in this regard nor any evidence was
led by the parties nor any finding has been returned. However, in view
of the admission made by the defendant in Para 3 of the written
statement that suit properties are absolute properties of Marappa
Gounder, he having purchased the same in a court auction-sale on 19-9
-1938, there was hardly any necessity to frame any issue in this regard,
once the fact was admitted in written statement.
17. It may be relevant to extract the relevant part of Para 3 of the
written statement which reads as under:
"3. It is true that the suit properties are the absolute properties of
the Marappa Gounder, he having purchased the suit properties in the
court auction-sale on 19-9-1938."
Furthermore. the defendants themselves have nowhere pleaded that
purchase of suit property was made by Marappa Gounder out of the
joint family funds. There is a clear admission in the written statement
that property in question was the absolute property of Marappa
Gounder, he having purchased the same in the court auction-sale.
18. In view of above facts, the arguments advanced by the learned
counsel for the respondent, in this regard, has no force and not liable to
be accepted.
19. In the backdrop of the above facts, the primary issue which
arises for our consideration is with respect to the right of the sole
daughter to inherit the self-acquired property of her father, in the
absence of any other legal heir having inheritable rights before the
commencement of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 or in other words,
whether such suit property will devolve on to the
daughter upon the death of her father intestate by inheritance or shall
devolve on to father's brother's son by survivorship.
20. The determination and adjudication of the issue depends upon
the answers to the following questions:
20.1. (1) What is the nature of the property and what would be the
course of succession if it is a separate property as opposed to undivided
property?
20.2. (2) Whether a sole daughter could inherit her father's separate
property dying intestate? And if so
20.3. (3) What would be the order of succession after the death of
such daughter?
21. To answer these questions, we are required to delve into the
concepts of old Hindu Law and its application. It is also imperative to
look into its origin and sources.
Sources of Hindu Law
22. The exact origin of Hindu Law is shrouded in antiquity, however,
the Hindus believe their laws to exist in the revelations preserved in
"Vedas", Shrutis (that which are heard and revealed) and Smritis in
contradiction to Shrutis (that which is remembered). The Smritis
comprise forensic law or the Dharma Shastra and are believed to be
recorded in the very words of Lord Brahma. The Dharma Shastra or
forensic law is to be found primarily in the institutes or collections
known as "Sanhitas", Smritis or in other words, the textbooks
attributed to the learned scholarly sages, such as, Manu, Yajnavalchya,
Vishnu, Parasara and Gautama, etc. Their writings are considered by
the Hindus as authentic works. On these commentaries, digests and
annotations have been written. These ancient sources have thus,
charted the development of Hindu Law. These sources constantly
evolved over the years, embracing the whole system of law, and are
regarded as conclusive authorities. Besides these sources customs,
equity, justice, good conscience and judicial decisions have also
supplemented the development of Hindu Law.
23. The commentaries by various learned scholars have given rise to
different schools of Hindu Law, like Dayabhaga in Bengal, Mayukha in
Bombay, Konkan and Gujarat and Marumakkattayam or Nambudri in
Kerala and Mitakshara in other parts of India. The Mitakshara school of
law is one of the most important schools of law having a very wide
jurisdiction. It applies to majority of India with slight variations with
the fundamental principles being the same. These slight variations
formed various sub-schools, namely, Banaras School, Mithila School,
Maharashtra/Bombay School, Dravida/Madras School.
24. The Mitakshara is supposed to be the leading authority in the
school of Benaras. Mr Colebrooke, a famous Sanskrit scholar of Bengal,
writes "the range of its authority and influence is far more extensive
than that of Jinota Vahanas Treatise for it is received in all other schools
of Hindu Law, from Benaras to the southern extremity of the Peninsula
of India, as the chief
groundwork of the doctrines which they follow, and as an authority from
which they rarely dissent"². The Mitakshara has always been considered
as the main authority for all the schools of law, with the sole exception
of that of Bengal, which is mostly covered by another school known as
Dayabhaga.
25. Reference may also be made to another observation at p. 165,
where it is stated as under:
"Failing male issue, therefore, a widow takes the self-acquired
property of her husband. No doubt, on failure of male issue and a
widow, the daughter would take."
26. The commentary also refers to a case of Pranjivandas Tulsidas V.
Devkuvarbai³, wherein a Hindu owning separate property died without a
male issue, leaving behind - a widow, four daughters and a brother
and male issues of other deceased brothers. The Court observed that
the widow was entitled to a life estate in the property and subject to
her interest the property would devolve to the daughters absolutely in
preference to the brother and the issue of the deceased brothers.
27. References to this case have also been made in numerous
reported as well as unreported cases; as in Tuljaram Morarji V.
"
The decision in that case and that in Pranjivandas Tulsidas V.
Devkuvarbai have been steadily followed by the High Court in
numerous unreported cases, and by the legal profession Any
departure now from those decisions would cause much confusion and
injustice throughout this Presidency, and no advantage that we can
perceive. We, therefore, must abide by the principles which they
clearly indicate."
28. In Chotay Lall V. Chunnoo Lall5 the Court noted:
"The following are the direct authorities on the point. Sir M.
Sausse in 1859, in Pranjivandas Tulsidas V. Devkuvarbai³, held that
a daughter takes absolutely when inheriting from her father. In
Bhaskar Trimbak Acharya V. Mahadev Ramji6, decided in January
1869 by Sir Joseph Arnould, the headnote states that all property
acquired by a married woman by inheritance (except from her
husband) classes as stridhan, and descends accordingly. But this
case is founded exclusively on the case of Pranjivandas Tulsidas V.
Devkuvarbai³.
29. However, despite our best efforts we could not get a copy of the
judgment in Pranjivandas ³, therefore, we are relying upon the aforesaid
observations made in the said case by the Bombay High Court as
mentioned in the commentary by Standish Grove Grady and the
abovementioned cases.
30. One of the sub-schools of Mitakshara-the - Madras school of law
tends to cover most of the southern part of India. It exercises its
authority under Mitakshara law school. The Mitakshara school derives
majorly from the running commentaries of Smritis written by
"Yajnavalkya". Other important sources governing the Mitakshara school
are "Vyavastha Chandrika" and most importantly Smriti Chandrika.
31. The digest of "Yajnavalkya" states that "What has been self-
acquired by any one, as an increment, without diminishing the paternal
estate, likewise a gift from a friend or a marriage gift, does not belong
to the co-heirs."
32. It may also be relevant to refer to commentaries and
annotations from The Principles and Elements of Hindu Law in the form
of a digest by Shyama Charan Sarkar Vidya Bhushan, known as
"Vyavastha Chandrika" a digest of Hindu Law. Section II of the said
digest deals with Daughters' Right of Succession.
33. In Clause 118 of Section II of the commentary, it is stated as
under:
"In default of the widow, the daughters inherit the estate of the
man who died separated (from his coparceners) and not re-united
(with them)." "
34. It also quotes "Vishnu" and "Vrihaspati" as under:
"Vishnu : The wealth of a man who leaves no male issue goes to
his wife; on failure of her, to his daughter.
Vrihaspati : The wife is pronounced successor to the wealth of her
husband; in her default, the daughter. As a son, so does the
daughter of a man proceed from his several limbs. How then, should
any other person (b) take her father's wealth?
(b) Any other person-These terms exclude the son and widow,
(who are preferable heirs), and include the father and the rest. -
Smriti Chandrika, Chapter XI, Section (ii), Clauses 5 and 6."
"The meaning is how could the father and the rest take the
property of a son-less man, while the daughter is alive."
35. It also quotes "Manu" as under:
"Manu : The son of a man is even as himself, and the daughter is
equal to the son. How then can any other inherit his property,
notwithstanding the survival of her, who is, as it were, himself."
36. Clause 120 of the "Vyavastha Chandrika" reads as under:
"120. A daughter being entitled to inherit the divided property of
her father, it has been, by parity of reasoning, determined that, she
is entitled to inherit also such property as was separately acquired or
held by him, or was vested in him."
37. The purport of the text of "Vrihaspati" is that the brother or the
father and like would not take the property of a man who died without
leaving a male, when the daughter is alive. By springing from the same
limbs of the father, a daughter has been treated in Smriti Chandrika as
equal to a son.
38. "Narada" aware of the equitableness of the proposition that it is
the daughter who should succeed on the failure of the son and the
widow, says, "on failure of male issue, the daughter inherits, for she is
equally a cause of perpetuating the race".
39. Standish Grove Grady in his book Treatise on Hindoo Law of
Inheritance published in 1868, in Chapter IX - "Inheritance of
Succession" while discussing the line of descent, has observed as
under:
"Line of Descent-It will be seen in the course of this chapter that
the Hindoo Law of inheritance comprehends the deceased's family
and his near relations, viz, his issue, male and female; his widow,
who takes immediately in default of sons-a term which includes
grandsons and great-grandsons. On exhaustion of this line of
descent, the succession ascends to his parents, brothers, nephews,
and grand nephews, this line continuing upwards to the grandfather
and great-grandfather, the grandmother and great grandmother, the
latter being given precedence by those who have preferred the
mother to the father. The succession then runs downwards to their
respective issue, including daughter's sons, but not daughters, the
whole being preferred to the half blood; then follow the more remote
kindred which we shall presently enumerate.
In proportion as the claimant becomes remote, the particulars
vary with different schools and authors presently pointed out.
In default of natural kind, the series of heirs in all the classes,
except that of Brahmins, closes with the preceptor of the deceased,
his pupil, his priest, hired to perform sacrifices, or his fellow-student,
each in his order and failing all these, the lawful heirs of the Kshtrya,
Vashya and Soodra, who are learned and virtuous Brahmins, resident
in the same town or village with the deceased.
If an estate should vest by succession in a Brahmin-as he, being
such, cannot perform obsequies for one of an inferior caste - the
duty may be discharged by substitution of a qualified person, equal
in class with the deceased. In all cases where the heir is under
disabilities, he must take the same course, paying the person
employed for his services. The king too where he takes by escheat,
must cause obsequies to be performed for the deceased.
The Hindoos give the agnate succession the preference, the
succession of females being deemed exceptions.
Females cannot on account of their sex perform obsequies. They
do not, therefore, confer any benefit and are generally disqualified
from inheriting. From this rule, there are only four exceptions for
special reasons, viz, the widow, the daughter, the mother and the
grandmother. According to the Benaras and Mithila Schools, the
females abovementioned inherit only when the family is divided. In
an undivided family, females are not admitted as heirs. There are
two modes of devolution of property:
(i) From a sole separate owner.
(ii) From a female.
Property of a united owner cannot be considered as devolving
upon the rest, they being joint proprietors by birth. In the second
class, the property will, in part, be affected by the rights of collateral
sharers.
But even in undivided families, a widow takes the self-acquired
property of her husband.
In the case of self-acquired property in the same Chapter, Grady
states:
"It may safely be stated as a true proposition that property, which
is not ancestral, is self-acquired, in whatever way the property may
have been obtained, whether by gift or purchase or labour, mental or
physical, or otherwise.
Referring to judgment of Katama Natchier V. Rajah of
Shivagunga8 [which we shall deliberate in the later part of the
judgment], he observes when a Zamindari was escheated on the
death of the last zamindar, the government granted it a new to a
distant relation of his. This was treated as self-acquired property.
That case has decided that all self-acquired property devolves in the
same way as the family property of a divided member. Failing male
issue, therefore, a widow takes the self-acquired property of her
husband. No doubt, on the failure of male issue and a widow, the
daughter would take".
(emphasis supplied)
40. In the commentary titled as "Hindu Law and Judicature" - from
the Dharma-sastra of Yajnavalkya by renowned authors Edward Roer,
PhD, MD and W.A. Montriou, in Clause 135, it is stated as under:
"135. If a man depart this life without male issue; (i) his wife, (ii)
his daughter, (iii) his parents, (iv) his brothers, (v) the sons of his
brothers, (vi) others of the same gotra, (vii) kindred more remote,
(viii) a pupil, (ix) a fellow-student - these succeed to the
inheritance, each class upon failure of the one preceding. This rule
applies to all the caste."
41. In another digest "Hindu Law As Administered in the Courts of
Madras Presidency10", arranged and annotated by H.S. Cunningham,
the then Advocate General of Madras, it is stated in Clause 203 of
Chapter VI, dealing with inheritance by daughters as under:
"203. In default of sons, grandsons, great-grandsons, and
widows, the daughter succeeds to a life estate in her father's
property."
42. Clause 206 of the said commentary provides that "a married
daughter and daughters who are widows succeed irrespectively of the
fact of their being barren or having no male issue" and similarly, Clause
207 reads as under:
"207. Daughters of each class hold their estate jointly; the share
of any daughter dying vests in the surviving daughter or daughters
of the same class, and descends to the daughters of the next class
only when all the daughters of the prior class are exhausted. In each
class, a daughter who has not been endowed on marriage, succeeds
in preference to the daughter who has been endowed."
43. Clause 209 in the said commentary reads as under:
"209. The daughter succeeds on the death of her father's widow,
notwithstanding that such widow be not her mother."
44. "Mulla" in his book Hindu Law (22nd Edn.), while discussing the
law prior to the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 says that there are two
systems of inheritance amongst the Hindus in India, namely,
Mitakshara system and Dayabhaga system. The Dayabhaga system
prevails in Bengal, while the Mitakshara system is applicable to other
parts of India. The difference between the two systems arises from the
fact that, while the doctrine of religious efficacy is the guiding principle
under the Dayabhaga School, there is no such definite guiding principle
under the Mitakshara School. Sometimes consanguinity, and at the
other times, religious efficacy has been regarded as the guiding
principle. According to "Mulla", Mitakshara recognises two modes of
devolution of property, namely, survivorship and succession. The rules
of survivorship apply to joint family property, and the rules of
succession apply to property held in absolute severalty by the last
owner.
45. It may also be relevant to refer to Section 34 regarding
devolution of property according to Mitakshara Law11 In determining
the mode in which the property of a Hindu male, governed by
Mitakshara Law, devolves on his death, the following propositions are to
be noted:
45.1. Where the deceased was, at the time of the death, a member
of joint and undivided family, technically called coparcenary, his
undivided interest in the coparcenary property devolves on his
coparceners by survivorship.
(i) Even if the deceased was joint at the time of his death, he
might have left self-acquired or separate property. Such property
goes to his heirs by succession according to the order given in
Section 43, and not to his coparceners.
(ii) If the deceased was at the time of his death, the sole
surviving member of a coparcenary property, the whole of his
property, including the coparcenary property, will pass to his heirs
by succession according to the order given in Section 43.
(iii) If the deceased was separate at the time of his death from his
coparceners, the whole of his property, however acquired, will pass
to his heirs by succession according to the order given in Section 43.
45.2. If the deceased was reunited at the time of his death, his
property will pass to his heirs by succession according to the Rule laid
down in Section 60.
46. According to "Mulla" under the Mitakshara Law, the right to
inherit arises from propinquity i.e. proximity of relationship. Mitakshara
divided blood relations into three classes, namely-
(a) Gotra-sapindas i.e. sapindas belonging to the same gotra or
family as the deceased from 1st-7th degree;
(b) Samanodaka i.e. persons belonging to the same gotra or
family as the deceased from 8th-14th degree; and
(c) Bhinna gotra sapindas i.e. Sapindas belonging to a different
gotra or family from the deceased.
47. "Gotra-sapindas" and "samanodaka" are persons connected to
the deceased by an unbroken line of male descendants i.e. all agnates;
and bhinna-gotra sapindas are persons connected to the deceased
through a female i.e. cognates such as a sister's son. "Bhinna-gotra
sapindas" are also known as "Bandhus" in Mitakshara. These
classifications while now archaic and delineated as Class I, Class II,
Class III and Class IV heirs under the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, are
of importance with respect to the property in question considering its
succession opened before the commencement of the Hindu Succession
Act, 1956.
48. The gotra-sapindas of a person, according to Mitakshara are:
(i) His six male descendants in the male line; i.e. his son, son's
son's son, etc.
(ii) His six male ascendants in the male line, the wives of the first
three of them, and probably also of the next three; i.e. his father,
father's father, father's father's father, etc, being FI to F6 in the table
and their wives, that is MI to M6, being the mother, father's mother,
father's father's mother, etc.
(iii) The six male descendants in the collateral male line of each of
his male ascendants; i.e. to X6 in the line of F1, being his brother,
brother's son, brother's son's son, etc. to X6 in the line of F2, being
his paternal uncle, paternal uncle's son, etc; to X6 in the line of F3,
being his paternal
granduncle, paternal granduncle's son, etc.; to X6 in the line of F4; to
X6 in the line of F5, and to X6 in the line of F6.
(iv) His six male ascendants in the male line, the wives of the first
three of them, and probably also of the next three; i.e. his father,
father's father, father's father's father, etc, being FI to F6 in the table
and their wives, that is MI to M6, being the mother, father's mother,
father's father's mother, etc.
(v) The six male descendants in the collateral male line of each of
his male ascendants; i.e. to X6 in the line of F1, being his brother,
brother's son, brother's son's son, etc; to X6 in the line of F2, being
his paternal uncle, paternal uncle's son, etc; to X6 in the line of F3,
being his paternal granduncle, paternal granduncle's son, etc.; to X6
in the line of F4; to X6 in the line of F5', and to X6 in the line of F6.
(iv) His wife, daughter, and daughter's son.
49. The Sapinda relationship extends to seven degrees reckoned
from and inclusive of the deceased and six degrees, if you exclude the
deceased. The wife becomes a sapinda of the husband on marriage. The
daughter's son is not a gotraja sapinda, he is a bandhu because he is
related to the deceased through a female. However, for the purpose of
succession, he is ranked with gotraja sapindas.
50. The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929 was the
earliest statutory legislation which brought the Hindu females into the
scheme of inheritance. The 1929 Act introduced certain female
statutory heirs which were already recognised bv the Madras School i.e.
the son's daughter, daughter's daughter, sister and sister's son in the
order so specified, without making any modifications in the
fundamental concepts underlying the textual Hindu Law relating to
inheritance; only difference being that while before the Act, they
succeeded as bandhus, under the Act, they inherited as "gotra
sapindas".
51. The Mitakshara law also recognises inheritance by succession but
only to the property separately owned by an individual, male or female.
Females are included as heirs to this kind of property by Mitakshara
law. Before the Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929, the
Bengal, Benares and Mithila sub-schools of Mitakshara recognised only
five female relations as being entitled to inherit, namely widow,
daughter, mother, paternal grandmother and paternal great-
grandmother. The Madras sub-school recognised the heritable capacity
of a larger number of females heirs that is of the son's daughter,
daughter's daughter and the sister, as heirs who are expressly named
as heirs in Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929. The son's
daughter and the daughter's daughter ranked as bandhus in Bombay
and Madras. The Bombay school which is most liberal to women,
recognised a number of other female heirs, including a half-sister,
father's sister and women married into the family such as step-mother,
son's widow, brother's widow and also many other females classified as
bandhus. From the above discussions, it is abundantly clear that a
daughter was in fact capable of inheriting the father's separate estate.
Judicial precedents
52. Privy Council has delivered some notable judgments on the issue
arising for adjudication in the case at hands. Reference may be made to
the case of Katama Natchier V. Rajah of Shivagunga8. The dispute in
the appeal before the Privy Council was in respect of the Right of
Inheritance of Shivagunga Zamindary, situate in the District Maduaa,
Presidency of Madras. The Privy Council after noticing the facts of the
long litigation and the three suits filed between the parties, which were
dismissed by the Provincial Court and the appeal was filed in each of
the three suits which were heard together and disposed of by the
decree of the Sudder Court. The Privy Council noted the following
arguments advanced before it, by Anga Moottoo Natchiar, as under :
"She submitted as in issue of fact that the Zamindary had been
acquired by the sole exertions and merits of her husband; and as an
issue of law that what is acquired by a man, without employment of
his patrimony, shall not be inherited by her brothers and co-heirs,
but if he dies without male issue, shall descend to his widows, his
daughters, and the parents, before going to his brothers or remoter
collaterals."
53. After analysing the factual aspects in details, the Privy Council
OnLine PC)
"The substantial contest between the appellant and the
respondent is, as it was between Anga Mootoo Natchiar and the
respondent's predecessors, whether the Zamindary ought to have
descended in the male and collateral line; and the determination of
this issue depends on the answers to be given to one or more of the
following questions:
First. Were Gowery Vallabha Taver and his brother, Oya Taver,
undivided in estate, or had a partition taken place between them?
Second. If they were undivided, was the Zamindary the self-
acquired and separate property or Gowery Vallabha Taver? And if
so-
Third. What is the course of succession according to the Hindoo
Law of the South of India of such an acquisition, where the family is
in other respects an undivided family?
54. Insofar as, the first question is concerned, the Privy Council did
not disturb the findings in the decree of 1847 that Gowery Vallabha
Taver and his brother, after the acquisition by the former of the
zamindary, lived very much as if they were separate. The second
question was answered in affirmative. With respect to the third
question, the Privy Council observed as under : (Rajah of Shivagunga
"The third question is one of nicety and of some difficulty. The
conclusion which the courts in India have arrived at upon it, is
founded
upon the opinion of the Pundits, and upon authorities referred to by
them. We shall presently examine those opinions and authorities; but
before doing so, it will be well to consider more fully the law of
inheritance as it prevails at Madras and throughout the southern parts
of India, and the principles on which it rests and by which it is
governed. The law which governs questions of inheritance in these
parts of India is to be found in the Mitakshara, and in Chapter II,
Section 1, of that work the right of widows to inherit in default of male
issue is fully considered and discussed.
The Mitakshara purports to be a commentary upon the earlier
institutes of Yajnyawalcya; and the section in question begins by
citing a text from that work, which affirms in general terms the right
of the widow to inherit on the failure of male issue. But then the
author of the Mitakshara refers to various authorities which are
apparently in conflict with the doctrines of Yajnyawalcya, and, after
reviewing those authorities, seeks to reconcile them by coming to
the conclusion 'that a wedded wife, being chaste, takes the whole
estate of a man, who, being separated from his co-heirs, and not
subsequently re-united with them, dies leaving no male issue.' This
text, it is true, taken by itself, does not carry the rights of widows to
inherit beyond the cases in which their husbands have died in a
state of separation from their co-heirs, and leaving no male issue;
but it is to be observed that the text is propounded as a qualification
of the larger and more general proposition in favour of widows; and,
consequently, that in construing it, we have to consider what are the
limits of the qualification, rather than what are the limits of the
right. Now, the very terms of the text refer to cases in which the
whole estate of the deceased has been his separate property, and,
indeed, the whole chapter in which the text is contained, seems to
deal only with cases in which the property in question has been
either wholly the common property of a united family, or wholly the
separate property of the deceased husband. We find no trace in it of
a
case like that before us, in which the property in question may
have been in part the common property of a united family, and in
part the separate acquisition of the deceased; and it cannot, we
think, be assumed that because widows take the whole estates of
their husbands when they have been separated from, and not
subsequently re-united with, their co-heirs, and have died leaving no
male issue, they cannot, when their husbands have not been so
separated, take any part of their estates, although it may have been
their husband's separate acquisition. The text, therefore, does not
seem to us to govern this case.
There being then no positive text governing the case before us,
we must look to the principles of the law to guide us in determining
it. It is to be observed, in the first place, that the general course of
descent of separate property according to the Hindoo law is not
disputed. It is admitted that, according to that law, such property
descends to widows in default of male issue. It is upon the
respondent, therefore, to make out that the property here in
question, which was separately acquired, does not descend
according
to the general course of the law. The way in which this is attempted to
be done, is by showing a general state of co-parcenaryship as to the
family property; but assuming this to have been proved, or to be
presumable from there being no disproof of the normal state of co-
parcenaryship, this proof, or absence of proof, cannot alter the case,
unless it be also the law that there cannot be property belonging to a
member of a united Hindoo family, which descends in a course different
from that of the descent of a share of the property held in union; but
such a proposition is new, unsupported by authority, and at variance
with principle. That two courses of descent may obtain on a part
division of join property, is apparent from a passage in W.H.
Macnaghten's "Hindu Law," title "Partition," Vol. I, p. 53, where it is
said as follows:
'According to the more correct opinion, where there is an
undivided residue, it is not subject to the ordinary rules of
partition of joint property; in other words, if at a general partition
any part of the property was left joint, the widow of a deceased
brother will not participate, notwithstanding the separation, but
such undivided residue will go exclusively to the brother.'
Again, it is not pretended that on the death of the acquirer of
separate property, the separately acquired property falls into the
common stock, and passes like ancestral property. On the contrary,
it is admitted that if the acquirer leaves male issue, it will descend
as separate property to that issue down to the third generation.
Although, therefore, where there is male issue, the family property
and the separate property would not descend to different persons,
they would descend in a different way, and with different
consequences; the sons taking their father's share in the ancestral
property subject to all the rights of the coparceners in that property,
and his self-acquired property free from those rights. The course of
succession would not be the same for the family and the separate
estate; and it is clear, therefore, that, according to the Hindoo law,
there need not be unity of heirship.
But to look more closely into the Hindoo law. When property
belonging in common to a united Hindoo family has been divided,
the divided shares go in the general course of descent of separate
property. Why, it may well be asked, should not the same rule apply
to property which from its first acquisition has always been separate?
We have seen from the passage already quoted from Macnaghten's
"Hindu Law," that where a residue is left undivided upon partition,
what is divided goes as separate property; what is undivided follows
the family property; that which remains as it was, devolves in the
old line; that which is changed and becomes separate, devolves in
the new line. In other words, the law of succession follows the nature
of the property and of the interest in it.
Again, there are two principles on which the rule of succession
according to the Hindoo law appears to depend : the first is that
which determines the right to offer the funeral oblation, and the
degree in which the person making the offering is supposed to
minister to the spiritual benefit of the deceased; the other is an
assumed right of survivorship. Most of the authorities rest the
uncontested right of widows to inherit the estates of their husbands,
dying separated from their kindred, on the first of these principles (1
Strange's "Hindu Law", p. 135). But some ancient authorities also
invoke the other principle.
Again, the theory which would restrict the preference of the
coparceners over the widows to partible property is not only, as is
shown above, founded upon an intelligible principle, but reconciles
the law of inheritance with the law of partition. These laws, as is
observed by Sir Thomas Strange, are so intimately connected that
they may almost be said to be blended together; and it is surely not
consistent with this position that coparceners should take separate
property by descent, when they take no interest in it upon partition.
We may further observe, that the view which we have thus indicated
of the Hindoo law is not only, as we have shown, most consistent
with its principles, but is also most consistent with convenience."
55. On a complete reading of the judgment of Privy Council in
extenso, the following legal principles are culled out:
55.1. That the general course of descends of separate property
according to the Hindu Law is not disputed - it is admitted that
according to that law such property (separate property) descends to
widow in default of male issue.
55.2. It is upon the respondent therefore to make out that the
property herein in question which was separately acquired does not
descend according to the general course of Law.
55.3. According to the more correct opinion where there is undivided
residue, it is not subject to ordinary rules of partition of joint property,
in other words if it a general partition any part of the property was left
joint the widow of the deceased brother will not participate
notwithstanding with separation but such undivided residue will go
exclusively to the brother.
55.4. The law of succession follows the nature of property and of the
interest in it.
55.5. The law of partition shows that as to the separately acquired
property of one member of a united family, the other members of the
family have neither community of interest nor unity of possession.
55.6. The foundation therefore of a right to take such property by
survivorship fails and there are no grounds for postponing the widow's
right to any superior right of the coparceners in the undivided property.
55.7. The Hindu Law is not only consistent with this principle but is
also most consistent with convenience.
56. Another case of the Privy Council is Sivagnanan Tevar V.
Pariasami1- The aforesaid case, before the Privy Council was in
continuity and of the consequence of the previous case Katama
Natchier but of a different branch of the family. In the said case, it was
"Their Lordships then have come to the conclusion that, as
between the descendants of Muttu Vaduga and Dhorai Pandian, the
palayapat was the separate property of the latter; that on the death
of Dhorai Pandian, his right, if he had any left undisposed of in the
property, passed to his widow, notwithstanding the undivided status
of the family; and that therefore, the case was one to which the rule
of succession affirmed in Shivagunga case 8 applies."
(emphasis in original)
57. The principles of law which can be deduced from reading of the
aforesaid judgment can be summarised as under:
57.1. The law laid down in Katama Natchier V. Rajah of
Shivagunga8, that succession in the case of Hindu male dying intestate
is to be governed by inheritance rather than survivorship, is reaffirmed.
57.2. In the absence of male member, the property devolves upon
widow and thereafter to daughter.
58. A Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court, in Ghurpatari V.
Sampati¹ while considering the question whether a custom under
which daughters are excluded from inheriting the property of their
father can by implication exclude the daughters' issues both males and
females, also from such inheritance, made the following observations in
respect of Right of Inheritance of a widow or a daughter of a male
"17. The rules relating to inheritance by widow and daughter were
enunciated in the ancient past by various sages and were ultimately
elaborated by Vijnyaneshwara in Mitakshara. We may quote from
Colebrooke's translation.
Katyayan said `let the widow succeed to her husband's wealth,
provided she be chaste; and in default of her let the daughter inherit
if married'. Brihaspati stated, 'the wife is pronounced successor to
the wealth of her husband; and in her default the daughter; as a son
so does the daughter of a man proceed from his several limbs, how
then shall any other person take the father's wealth'? Vishnu laid
down, 'if a man leaves neither son, nor son's son, nor wife, nor
female issue, the daughter's son shall take his wealth, for in regard
to the obsequies of ancestors, daughter's son is considered as son's
son.' Manu likewise declared that 'by a male child, who were
daughter whether formally appointed or not, shall produce from a
husband of an equal class, the maternal grandfather becomes the
grand sire of son's son, let that son give the funeral oblation and
possess the
inheritance." The right of daughter and daughter's son to succeed to the
property was thus well recognised in the Mitakshara Law. The daughter
ranks fifth in the order of succession and the daughter's son ranked
sixth."
59. Thereafter, the Court proceeded to consider the question of
custom prevalent in a particular sect and whether they will have the
sources of law with which we are not concerned in the case at hands.
60. The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act 2 of 1929
(hereinafter called as "the 1929 Act"), for the first time entitled the
daughter's daughter, subject to a special family or local custom, to
succeed to the property of a male Hindu governed by Mitakshara Law.
Daughter's daughter then ranked 13th-B in the order of succession. The
order of succession to the estate of a Hindu dying intestate and
governed by Mitakshara Law are set out in Para 43 of Mulla's Principles
of Hindu Law1 14 as under:
"43. The Sapindas succeeded in the following order:
1-4. A son, grandson (son's son) and great-grandson (son's son's
son) and (after 14-4-1937) widow, predeceased son's widow, and
predeceased son's son's widow.
5. Daughter
6. Daughter's son
13. Father's father
13.A Son's daughters
13.B Daughter's daughter"
61. In Lal Singh V. Roor Singh15 , it was held that daughters and
daughters' son have a preferential claim to the non-ancestral property
as against the collaterals.
62. In Gopal Singh V. Ujagar Singh16 it was observed by this Court
that the daughter succeeds to the self-acquired property of her father
in preference to collaterals. This Court proceeded to rely upon the
following observation in Rattigan's Digest to Customary Law : (AIR p.
580, para 8)
"8.
'In regard to the acquired property of her father, the
daughter is preferred to the collaterals.' "
Reference may also be made to the decision of the Bombay High
Court in Devidas V. Vithabai17. In the said case, one Arjuna died in
1936, when succession opened and while determining the shares
during partition daughter of one pre-deceased sons of Arjuna, namely,
Vithabai was held entitled for a share. The name of Vithabai was
removed from revenue record. She filed a suit for declaration claiming
1/3rd share with other reliefs. The trial court dismissed the suit. The
first appellate court held that the plaintiff, Vithabai, being daughter
of Zolu was a Class I heir and thus, was entitled to 1/3rd share and
accordingly, reversed the decree. The matter was carried in second
appeal.
64. The High Court while reversing the decree of lower appellate
OnLine All para 12)
"12. Zolu, when died in 1935 was joint with his father and
brothers. Therefore, his share in the coparcenary would devolve by
survivorship and not by succession. Zolu did not hold any separate
property admittedly and therefore, there was no question of property
passing over by succession. The following illustration to Section 24 in
Mulla's Hindu Law, 19th Edn. shall be enough to unfortunately
negative the claim of the plaintiff. The case is squarely covered by
this illustration.
(1) A and B two Hindu brothers, governed by the Mitakshara
School of Hindu Law, are members of a joint and undivided
family. A dies leaving his brother B and a daughter. A's share in
the joint family property will pass to his brother, the surviving
coparcener, and not to his daughter. However, if A and B were
separate, A's property would on his death pass to his daughter as
his heir.
The plaintiff due to the above proposition of law was not entitled to succeed to the
estate of her father. The persons on whom the share of Zolu devolved were his
brothers and father by survivorship. The share could not devolve on the daughter
by succession since the plaintiff herself pleads that the property was joint and
there was no partition. It was, therefore, not a separate estate of Zolu so that rule
of succession could be applied. The property therefore passed over by
survivorship in favour of brothers and father who were coparceners."
65. The 174th Law Commission in its report on "Property Rights of
Women" while proposing reforms under the Hindu Law has observed as
under:
"1.3.3. The Mitakshara law also recognises inheritance by
succession but only to the property separately owned by an
individual, male or female. Females are included as heirs to this kind
of property by Mitakshara law. Before the Hindu Law of Inheritance
(Amendment) Act, 1929, the Bengal, Benares and Mithila sub-
schools of Mitakshara recognised only five female relations as being
entitled to inherit, namely- widow, daughter, mother, paternal
grandmother, and paternal great-grand mother.
1. The Madras sub-school recognised the heritable capacity of a
larger number of females heirs that is of the son's daughter,
daughter's daughter and the sister, as heirs were expressly
named as heirs in Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act,
1929.
2. The son's daughter and the daughter's daughter ranked as
bandhus in Bombay and Madras. The Bombay School which is
most liberal to women, recognised a number of other female
heirs, including a half sister, father's sister and women married
into the family such as
stepmother, son's widow, brother's widow and also many other females
classified as bandhus."
66. From the above discussions, it is clear that ancient texts as also
the Smritis, the commentaries written by various renowned learned
persons and even judicial pronouncements have recognised the rights
of several female heirs, the wives and the daughters being the foremost
of them.
67. The rights of women in the family to maintenance were in every
case very substantial rights and on whole, it would seem that some of
the commentators erred in drawing adverse inferences from the vague
references to women's succession in the earlier Smritis. The views of
the Mitakshara on the matter are unmistakable. Vijneshwara also
nowhere endorses the view that women are incompetent to inherit.
Our analysis
68. Right of a widow or daughter to inherit the self-acquired
property or share received in partition of a coparcenary property of a
Hindu male dying intestate is well recognised not only under the old
customary Hindu Law but also by various judicial pronouncements and
thus, our answer to the Questions 1 and 2 are as under:
"If a property of a male Hindu dying intestate is a self-acquired
property or obtained in partition of a coparcenary or a family
property, the same would devolve by inheritance and not by
survivorship, and a daughter of such a male Hindu would be entitled
to inherit such property in preference to other collaterals."
69. In the case at hands, since the property in question was
admittedly the self-acquired property of Marappa Gounder despite the
family being in state of jointness upon his death intestate, his sole
surviving daughter Kupayee Ammal, will inherit the same by
inheritance and the property shall not devolve by survivorship.
70. Insofar as, Question 3 is concerned under the old customary
Hindu Law, there are contradictory opinions in respect of the order of
succession to be followed after the death of such a daughter inheriting
the property from his father. One school is of the view that such a
daughter inherits a limited estate like a widow, and after her death
would revert back to the heirs of the deceased male who would be
entitled to inherit by survivorship. While other school of thought holds
the opposite view. This conflict of opinion may not be relevant in the
present case inasmuch as since Kupayee Ammal, daughter of Marappa
Gounder, after inheriting the suit property upon the death of Marappa
Gounder, died after enforcement of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
(hereinafter referred to as "the 1956 Act"), which has amended and
codified the Hindu Law relating to intestate succession among Hindus.
The main scheme of this Act is to establish complete equality between
male and female with regard to property rights and the rights of the
female were declared absolute, completely abolishing all notions of a
limited estate.
71. The 1956 Act brought about changes in the law of succession
among Hindus and gave rights which were till then unknown in relation
to women's property. The 1956 Act lays down a uniform and
comprehensive system of inheritance and applies, inter alia, to persons
governed by the Mitakshara and Dayabhaga Schools and also to those
governed previously by the Murumakkattayam, Aliyasantana and
Nambudri laws. The 1956 Act applies to every person, who is a Hindu
by religion in any of its forms including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a
follower of the Brahmo Prarthana or Arya Samaj and even to any person
who is Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion excepting one who is Muslim,
Christian, Parsi or Jew or Sikh by religion.
72. Section 14 of the 1956 Act declares property of a female Hindu
to be her absolute property, which reads as under:
"14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property.
-(1) Any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether acquired
before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her
as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.
Explanation.-In this sub-section, "property" includes both
movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by
inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or
arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a
relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by her own skill or
exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other manner
whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as stridhana
immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any
property acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other
instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an
award where the terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the
decree, order or award prescribe a restricted estate in such
property."
73. The legislative intent of enacting Section 14(1) of the Act was to
remedy the limitation of a Hindu woman who could not claim absolute
interest in the properties inherited by her but only had a life interest in
the estate so inherited.
74. Section 14(1) converted all limited estates owned by women
into absolute estates and the succession of these properties in the
absence of a will or testament would take place in consonance with
Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, which reads as follows:
"15. General rules of succession in the case of female
Hindus. -(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall
devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16-
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children
of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or
mother shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the
deceased (including the children of any pre-deceased son or
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1)
in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the father;
and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband
or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in the absence of any son
or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre-
deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in
sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs
of the husband.
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among
heirs of a female Hindu.-The order of succession among the heirs
referred to in Section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the
intestate's property among those heirs shall take place, according to
the following rules, namely:
Rule .-Among the heirs specified in sub-section (1) of
Section 15, those in one entry shall be preferred to those in any
succeeding entry and those included in the same entry shall take
simultaneously.
Rule 2.-If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre-
deceased the intestate leaving his or her own children alive at the
time of the intestate's death, the children of such son or daughter
shall take between them the share which such son or daughter
would have taken if living at the intestate's death.
Rule 3.-The devolution of the property of the intestate on the
heirs referred to in clauses (b), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and
in sub-section (2) to Section 15 shall be in the same order and
according to the same rules as would have applied if the property
had been the father's or the mother's or the husband's as the
case may be, and such person had died intestate in respect
thereof immediately after the intestate's death."
75. The scheme of sub-section (1) of Section 15 goes to show that
property of Hindu females dying intestate is to devolve on her own
heirs, the list whereof is enumerated in clauses (a) to (e) of Section 15
(1). Sub-section (2) of Section 15 carves out exceptions only with
regard to property acquired through inheritance and further, the
exception is confined to the property inherited by a Hindu female either
from her father or mother, or from her husband, or from her father-in-
law. The exceptions carved out by sub-section (2) shall operate only in
the event of the Hindu female dies without leaving any direct heirs i.e.
her son or daughter or children of the pre-deceased son or daughter.
76. Thus, if a female Hindu dies intestate without leaving any issue,
then the property inherited by her from her father or mother would go
to the heirs of her father whereas the property inherited from her
husband or father-in-law would go to the heirs of the husband. In case,
a female Hindu dies leaving behind her husband or any issue, then
Section 15(1)(a) comes into operation and the properties left behind
including the properties which she inherited from
her parents would devolve simultaneously upon her husband and her
issues as provided in Section 15(1)(a) of the Act.
77. The basic aim of the legislature in enacting Section 15(2) is to
ensure that inherited property of a female Hindu dying issueless and
intestate, goes back to the source.
78. Section 15(1)(d) provides that failing all heirs of the female
specified in Entries (a)-(c), but not until then, all her property
howsoever acquired will devolve upon the heirs of the father. The
devolution upon the heirs of the father shall be in the same order and
according to the same rules as would have applied if the property had
belonged to the father and he had died intestate in respect thereof
immediately after her death. In the present case since the succession
of the suit properties opened in 1967 upon death of Kupayee Ammal,
the 1956 Act shall apply and thereby Ramasamy Gounder's daughters
being Class I heirs of their father too shall be heirs and entitled to
1/5th share each in the suit properties.
79. This Court while analysing the provisions of Sections 15 and 16
of the Act in State of Punjab V. Balwant Singh18, has held as under :
"7. Sub-section (1) of Section 15 groups the heirs of a female
intestate into five categories and they are specified under clauses (a)
to (e). As per Section 16 Rule 1 those in one clause shall be
preferred to those in the succeeding clauses and those included in
the same clause shall take simultaneously. Sub-section (2) of
Section 15 begins with a non obstante clause providing that the
order of succession is not that prescribed under sub-section (1) of
Section 15. It carves out two exceptions to the general order of
succession provided under sub-section (1). The first exception
relates to the property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or
mother. That property shall devolve, in the absence of any son or
daughter of the deceased (including the children of the pre-deceased
son or daughter), not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section
(1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the father.
The second exception is in relation to the property inherited by a
female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law. That
property shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the
deceased (including the children of the pre-deceased son or
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to under sub-section (1)
in the order specified thereunder but upon the heirs of the husband.
8. The process of identifying the heirs of the intestate under sub-
section (2) of Section 15 has been explained in Bajaya V.
Gopikabai19 There this Court observed that the rule under which the
property of the intestate would devolve is regulated by Rule 3 of
Section 16 of the Act. Rule 3 of Section 16 provides that
'Rule 3.-The devolution of the property of the intestate on the
heirs referred to in clauses (b), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and in
sub-section (2) of Section 15 shall be in the same order and
according to the same rules as would have applied if the property
had been the father's or the mother's or the husband's as the case
may be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof
immediately after the intestate's death.' "
80. Again in Bhagat Ram V. Teja Singh20, a two-Judge Bench of this
Court analysing the provisions of Sections 14, 15 and 16 of the Act
reiterating the view taken in the State of Punjab V. Balwant Singh18,
"13. The source from which she inherits the property is always
important and that would govern the situation. Otherwise persons
who are not even remotely related to the person who originally held
the property would acquire rights to inherit that property. That would
defeat the intent and purpose of sub-section (2) of Section 15, which
gives a special pattern of succession."
81. Applying the above settled legal proposition to the facts of the
case at hands, since the succession of the suit properties opened in
1967 upon death of Kupayee Ammal, the 1956 Act shall apply and
thereby Ramasamy Gounder's daughter's being Class I heirs of their
father too shall also be heirs and entitled to 1/5th share in each of the
suit properties.
82. Unfortunately, neither the trial court nor the High Court adverted
itself to the settled legal propositions which are squarely applicable in
the facts and circumstances of the case. Thus, the impugned judgment
and decree dated 1-3-1994 passed by the trial court and confirmed by
the High Court vide judgment and order dated 21-1-2009 are not
liable to be sustained and are hereby set aside.
83. The appeal, accordingly, stands allowed and the suit stands
decreed.
84. Let a preliminary decree be drawn accordingly. It shall be open
to the parties to invoke the jurisdiction of appropriate court for
preparation of final decree in accordance with law.
85. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we do not
make any order as to costs.
+
215 (Madras High Court, AS No. 351 of 1994, dt. 21-1-2009) [Reversed]
1
2 A Treatise on the Hindoo Law of Inheritance by Standish Grove Grady published in 1868 by
Gantz Brother Mount Road, Madras.
3
Pranjivandas Tulsidas V. Devkuvarbai, (1859) 1 Bom HC 130
4
5
6
Bhaskar Trimbak Acharya V. Mahadev Ramji, (1869) 6 Bom HC Rep (OC) 1
7 Vyavastha-Chandrika, A Digest of Hindu Law by Shyama Charan Sarkar, Vidya Bhushan
printed in 1878 by I.C. Bose & Co., Stanhope Press 249, Bow-Bazar, Calcutta.
8
9
Hindu Law and Judicature from the Dharma-Sastra of Yajnavalkya published in 1859.
10 A Digest of Hindu Law as administered in the Courts of The Madras Presidency, published in
1877 by Higginbotham & Co., Madras.
11 Hindu Law by Mulla (22nd Edn.).
12
14 Mulla's Principles of Hindu Law (14th Edn.).
15
16 Gopal Singh V. Ujagar Singh, AIR 1954 SC 579
17
18
19
20