In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD AND HIMA KOHLI, JJ.)
STATE OF JHARKHAND
Appellant;
Versus
SHAILENDRA KUMAR RAI ALIAS PANDAV RAI
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 1441 of 2022 , decided on October 31, 2022
A. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 376 - Rape - Two-finger test to determine
whether victim was habituated to sexual intercourse - Held, has been
stringently deprecated, because of the regressive and invasive nature of
such test - Further held, this so-called test has no scientific basis and
neither proves nor disproves allegations of rape - It instead re-victimises
and re-traumatises women who may have been sexually assaulted, and is
an affront to their dignity - Therefore, held, "two-finger test" or per
vaginum test must not be conducted, particularly, when in terms of S. 53-A
of the Evidence Act, evidence of a victim's character or of her previous
sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant to the issue of
consent or the quality of consent, in prosecutions of sexual offences
- Directions issued to Central Government/State Governments in this
regard, and held, that any person who conducts the "two-finger test" or per
vaginum examination (while examining a person alleged to have been
subjected to a sexual assault) in contravention of the directions of Supreme
Court shall be guilty of misconduct
- Evidence Act, 1872, S. 53-A [as inserted by the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2013]
Held :
Whether a woman is "habituated to sexual intercourse" or "habitual to sexual
intercourse" is irrelevant for the purposes of determining whether the ingredients of
Section 375 IPC are present in a particular case. The so-called test is based on the
incorrect assumption that a sexually active woman cannot be raped. Nothing could
be further from the truth - a woman's sexual history is wholly immaterial while
adjudicating whether the accused raped her. Further, the probative value of a
woman's testimony does not depend upon her sexual history. It is patriarchal and
sexist to suggest that a woman cannot be believed when she states that she was
raped, merely for the reason that she is sexually active.
(Para 65)
In terms of Section 53-A of the Evidence Act, evidence of a victim's character or
of her previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant to the issue
of consent or the quality of consent, in prosecutions of sexual offences.
(Para 66)
The Supreme Court directs the Union Government as well as the State
Governments to : (1) Ensure that the guidelines formulated by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare are circulated to all government and private hospitals.
(2) Conduct workshops for health providers to communicate the appropriate
procedure to be adopted while examining survivors of sexual assault and rape. (3)
Review the curriculum in medical schools with a view to ensuring that the "two-
finger test" or per vaginum examination is not prescribed as one of the procedures
to be adopted while examining survivors of sexual assault and rape.
(Para 69)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, "Medico-legal care for
survivors/victims of sexual violence" (19-3-2014), considered
Any person who conducts the "two-finger test" or per vaginum examination
(while examining a person alleged to have been subjected to a sexual assault) in
contravention of the directions of the Supreme Court shall be guilty of misconduct.
(Para 71)
B. Evidence Act, 1872 - Ss. 32(1) & 3 - Dying declaration - Whether,
on facts, the statement of the deceased satisfied the conditions laid down in
S. 32(1) of the Evidence Act - Held, cl. (1) of S. 32 indicates that in cases
where the cause of a person's death comes into question, a statement
made by that person is relevant when it relates to : (a) the cause of death;
or (b) any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in death
- Victim raped and set on fire in her house - Deceased clearly stated
that accused poured kerosene on her and set her on fire - As per post-
mortem report, the cause of death found as septicaemia caused by the burn
injuries sustained by the deceased - In addition, the statement of the
deceased disclosed that the accused raped her before setting her on fire -
This, held, a description of the circumstances of the transaction which
resulted in her death - Resultantly, the statement of the deceased not
only, held, satisfied the conditions in S. 32(1), but this itself, held, a relevant
fact and, therefore, it shall be considered to be a dying declaration - Penal
Code, 1860, Ss. 302, 341, 376 and 448
(Paras 40 to 43)
C. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 32(1) - Dying declaration - Corroboration -
Absence of definite medical opinion as to commission of rape - Held, not
material when the dying declaration was unequivocal regarding commission
of the assault and was not otherwise suspicious
- Victim raped and set her on fire in her own house - Dying declaration made it
abundantly clear that the accused raped the deceased, poured kerosene on her,
and set her on fire - Cause of death found septicaemia, occurring as a result of the
burn injuries - Hence, the victim's death, held, a direct result of the injuries inflicted
upon her by the accused - Resultantly, considering entire materials, a lack of
definite medical evidence as to the commission of rape declined to be taken to
mean that no rape was committed upon the deceased, particularly, when her dying
declaration unequivocally stated that the accused raped her before setting her on
fire - Held, there is no rule mandating the corroboration of the dying declaration
through medical or other evidence, when the dying declaration is not otherwise
suspicious - Penal Code, 1860, Ss. 302, 341, 376 and 448
Held :
It is well settled that, as a matter of law, a dying declaration can be acted upon
without corroboration. There is not even a rule of prudence which has hardened
into a rule of law that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon unless it is
corroborated. The primary effort of the court has to be to find out whether the
dying declaration is true. If it is, no question of corroboration arises. It is only if the
circumstances surrounding the dying declaration are not clear or convincing that the
court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration to the dying declaration.
(Para 55)
D. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 32(1) - Dying declaration - Recording of, by
a police officer - Admissibility and relevant consideration - Law clarified
- Held, there is no rule to the effect that a dying declaration is inadmissible
when it is recorded by a police officer instead of a Magistrate - Further held,
although a dying declaration ought to ideally be recorded by a Magistrate if possible,
it cannot be said that dying declarations recorded by police personnel are
inadmissible for that reason alone - However, the issue of whether a dying
declaration recorded by the police is admissible must be decided after considering
the facts and circumstances of each case
(Para 44)
E. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 32(1) - Dying declaration - Yardstick for
evaluation of, formulated
(Para 45)
F. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 32(1) - Dying declaration - Non-recording in
the form of questions and answers - Held, does not impact either its
admissibility or its probative value
Held :
There is no format prescribed for recording a dying declaration. Indeed, no such
format can be prescribed. Therefore, it is not obligatory that a dying declaration
should be recorded in a question-answer form. There may be occasions when it is
possible to do so and others when it may not be possible to do so either because
of the prevailing situation or because of the pain and agony that the victim might be
suffering at that point of time.
(Para 47)
Factually, the dying declaration was recorded in the victim's words and read out
to her, after which she affixed her signature to it. There is no reason to believe that
the statement was a result of tutoring or that the deceased was incapable of
making a statement. It is evident that the dying declaration was made voluntarily
and is true. The deceased was in a competent state of mind when she made to the
police officer.
(Paras 49 and 51)
246, followed
G. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 32(1) - Dying declaration - Mental fitness
and voluntariness - Determination on facts
- Dying declaration claimed to be recorded by the IO in presence of
doctor - Both the IO and the doctor attested to this fact during their
examinations - Further, the doctor also satisfied that the deceased was
physically and mentally fit to make a statement, and certified the same in
writing - Further, the dying declaration recorded in the victim's words and
read out to her, after which she affixed her signature to it - Statement also
not found a result of tutoring and, further, there found no enmity between
the deceased and the accused - Fact that the IO did not remember
whether the deceased was admitted in the general ward or the ICU, held
not material, when the doctor testified as to dying declaration being
recorded in his presence - Resultantly, the dying declaration, held, made
voluntarily and true in a competent state of mind
(Paras 48 to 51)
H. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 45 - Opinion of Medical Officer - Held, is
advisory in nature and not binding on the witness of fact
Held :
The opinion of the Medical Officer is to assist the court as he is not a witness of
fact and the evidence given by the Medical Officer is really of an advisory character
and not binding on the witness of fact.
(Para 54)
I. Criminal Trial - Witnesses - Hostile witness - Hostile witnesses
including family members of victim - Effect, when case supported by dying
declaration
- Though, certain witnesses including the family members of the victim
declared hostile, but the prosecution not claimed that they were
eyewitnesses to the crime - Rather, these witnesses' testimonies found
relevant mainly to show that the deceased consistently stated that the
respondent raped and
murdered her, to different persons - Resultantly, the absence of evidence which
establishes the consistency of the dying declaration over a period of time, held, not
fatal to the prosecution's case, particularly, when the dying declaration found
recorded in the victim's words and read out to her, after which she affixed her
signature on it - Factors responsible for witnesses turning hostile, reiterated -
Evidence Act, 1872 - Ss. 32(1) and 154 - Penal Code, 1860, Ss. 302, 341, 376
and 448
Held :
The following reasons can be discerned which make witnesses retracting their
statements before the court and turning hostile:
(i) Threat/Intimidation.
(ii) Inducement by various means.
(iii) Use of muscle and money power by the accused.
(iv) Use of stock witnesses.
(v) Protracted trials.
(vi) Hassles faced by the witnesses during investigation and trial.
(vii) Non-existence of any clear-cut legislation to check hostility of witness.
(para 56)
Apart from the above, another significant reason for witnesses turning hostile
may be what is described as "culture of compromise". The normalising function of
the socio-legal category of compromise converts terror into a bargain in a context
where there is no witness protection programme. This often accounts for why
prosecution witnesses routinely turn hostile by the time the case comes on trial, if
the victim does not lose the will to live.
(Para 56)
In addition to these factors, witnesses who know the deceased victim may turn
hostile because they wish to move on with their lives. Testifying as to the
circumstances surrounding the rape and death of a loved one can be a deeply
traumatising event, which is only compounded by the slow pace of the criminal
justice system.
(Para 57)
followed
"Justice is a Secret : Compromise in Rape Trials" (2010) 44, Issue 3, Contributions
to Indian Sociology, pp. 207-33, cited
J. Constitution of India - Art. 136 - Appeal by special leave -
Interference with acquittal recorded by High Court - When permissible -
Held, while Supreme Court does not ordinarily interfere with orders of
acquittal passed by High Courts, it may exercise its power to do complete
justice and reverse orders of acquittal to avert a miscarriage of justice
(Para 62)
Shailendra Kumar Rai V. State of Jharkhand, Criminal Appeal No. 1533 of 2006,
order dated 27-1-2018 (Jhar), reversed
to
K. Evidence Act, 1872 - S. 60 r/w S. 6 - Hearsay - Whether admissible
- Part of the testimony, when to be ignored on ground of - Unnamed
doctor's opinion - Held, cannot be sought to be brought out through
another doctor - As per S. 60, any oral evidence which refers to an opinion,
held, must be the evidence of the person who holds that opinion - Criminal
Trial - Medical Jurisprudence/Evidence - Medical/Expert opinion - Hearsay
(Para 37)
SK-D/69626/SR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Vishnu Sharma, Ms Madhusmita Bora (Advocate-on-Record),
Dipankar Singh and Ms Anupama Sharma, Advocates, for the
Appellant;
Braj Kishore Mishra (Advocate-on-Record), Bikram and Abhishek
Yadav, Advocates, for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Shailendra Kumar Rai
311f
2. Criminal Appeal No. 1533 of 2006, order dated 27-1
-2018 (Jhar), Shailendra Kumar Rai V. State of
Jharkhand (reversed)
306a, 311b, 320f
Ramesh V. State of Haryana
319a
V. State of Haryana
321b-c
Surinder Kumar V. State of Punjab
317a
Vishnu V. State of Maharashtra
318c-d
Punjab V. Ajaib Singh
320e-f
Karnataka V. Shariff
315g
Bihari Yadav V. State of Bihar
316f
Surat Singh
320e-f
Bhagirath V. State of Haryana
315g
U.P. V. Ram Sagar Yadav
318e
Gopalsingh V. State of M.P.
318f
U.P.
311d-e, 314b, 314d
of Punjab
318f
Bombay
316a, 318e-f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
Background
305
(i)
An overview of the testimonies of the witnesses
306
examined by the prosecution
(a) Lallan Prasad, PW 11
306
(b) Dr R.K. Pandey, PW 6
306
(c) Dr Minu Mukherjee, PW 9
307
(d) Dr R. Mahto, PW 8
307
(e) Suresh Yadav, PW 12
308
(f) Rekha Dasgupta, PW 7
308
(a) Hostile witnesses
308
(ii)
An overview of the testimonies of the witnesses
308
examined by the defence
(a) Dhirendra Rai, DW 1
308
(b) Dasrath Tiwary, DW 2
309
(c) Balmukund Rai, DW 3
309
(iii)
The decision of the Sessions Court
309
(iv)
The High Court's judgment on appeal
310
B.
Issues
311
C.
Submissions
311
D.
Analysis
312
(i)
The statement of the deceased is relevant under
312
Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act, 1872
(a) The victim died due to the burn injuries
312
sustained by her
(b) The statement of the deceased relates to the
314
cause of her death and the circumstances of the
transaction which resulted in her death
(c) The admissibility and probative value of the
315
dying declaration
(ii)
The prosecution has proved its case against the
317
respondent beyond reasonable doubt
E.
Parting remarks
320
1. This appeal arises from the judgment of the High Court of
Jharkhand dated 27-1-2018¹ The High Court allowed the appeal by the
respondent and set aside the order of conviction and, consequently, of
sentence passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, FTC-II Deoghar, on
10-10-2006 and 11-10-2006 respectively. The Sessions Judge had
convicted the respondent for the offences punishable under Sections
302, 376, 341 and 448 of the Penal Code, 1860 ("IPC") and sentenced
him to suffer imprisonment for life.
A. Background
2. The case of the prosecution is that the respondent entered the
house of the victim and the deceased in Narangi Village on the
afternoon of 7-11-2004. It is alleged that he pushed her to the ground
and committed rape upon her, while threatening to kill her if she
sounded an alarm. She called out for help, at which point the
respondent allegedly poured kerosene on her and set her on fire with a
matchstick. Her cries for help led to her grandfather, mother, and a
resident of the village to come to her room. The respondent is alleged
to have fled the scene upon seeing them.
3. The victim's family (along with the villager) extinguished the fire
and took her to Sadar Hospital, Deoghar, where she was admitted and
underwent treatment for the injuries sustained by her. The station-in-
charge at PS Sarwna, received information regarding the incident and
travelled to Deoghar, where he recorded the victim's "fard beyan" on
the same day (i.e. 7-11-2004). In her statement, she narrated the
incident as described in para 2 above.
4. FIR No. 163 of 2004 was registered at PS Sarwna on the basis of
the statement of the victim and the investigation commenced. Lallan
Prasad was the IO and later, Suresh Yadav took over the investigation
from him. Upon the completion of the investigation, the IO submitted a
charge-sheet under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 for the offences under Sections 307, 341, 376 and 448 IPC. The
victim died on 14-12-2004, leading to the submission of a
supplementary charge-sheet against the respondent, with reference to
Section 302 IPC.
5. The respondent denied his guilt.
6. During the trial, the prosecution examined twelve witnesses in
support of its case and the defence examined three witnesses. An
overview of their testimonies in chief and cross-examination as well as
their status as witnesses follows.
(i) An overview of the testimonies of the witnesses examined by
the prosecution
(a) Lallan Prasad, PW 11
7. Lallan Prasad, the station-in-charge of Police Station Sarwna,
deposed that he received information regarding the incident on 7-11-
2004, upon which he travelled to Deoghar. He recorded the victim's
statement at Sadar Hospital,
Deoghar on the same day, in his own handwriting, and read the
contents of her declaration to her. She affixed her signature to the
declaration in his presence, and he signed the declaration as well. Also
in Lallan Prasad's presence, the grandfather and mother of the victim
and co-villager affixed their signatures to the declaration and Dr R.K.
Pandey certified that the victim was fit to make a statement and affixed
his signature to the statement. Lallan Prasad stated that Dr R.K. Pandey
was present when he recorded the statement of the deceased.
Thereafter, he recorded the statements of Dr R.K. Pandey, and other
witnesses. A senior nurse, Rekha Dasgupta, produced the victim's
undergarments; Lallan Prasad took them into custody and prepared a
seizure list recording the same.
8. The IO stated that he examined the scene of the crime and found
burnt clothes, an empty bottle of what seemed to be kerosene, and
dust in the veranda, where the crime is said to have occurred. He
observed that the wall and the floor had burn marks. He seized the
burnt clothes and the empty bottle and prepared a seizure list. He also
recorded the statements of various other witnesses.
9. In response to the questions posed to him during cross-
examination, Lallan Prasad stated that he did not make a requisition to
the CJM, Deoghar to record the statements of either the respondent or
the deceased. Further, he did not request the doctor on duty at the
time or the civil surgeon to record the victim's statement. He stated
that he recorded her statement himself as her health was rapidly
deteriorating.
10. He stated that he was unable to remember whether the victim
was admitted in the Intensive Care Unit or the general ward, as well as
the number of patients in the same ward. The IO testified that he did
not find a matchbox, kerosene lamp, lantern, or any other material
which could light a fire at the scene of the crime. He stated that he did
not send the empty bottle which he had seized from the scene of the
crime to a laboratory because he was transferred soon after he seized
it.
(b) Dr R.K. Pandey, PW 6
11. Dr R.K. Pandey, a Medical Officer at Sadar Hospital, testified that
he examined the victim on 7-11-2004, when she was brought to the
hospital to treat her burn injuries. He certified that the deceased was
mentally and physically fit to make the statement. Dr R.K. Pandey was
examining a patient on the table adjacent to the deceased when the
latter made her statement to Lallan Prasad.
(c) Dr Minu Mukherjee, PW 9
12. Dr Minu Mukherjee, a Medical Officer at Sadar Hospital, deposed
that she was a member of the Medical Board constituted to examine the
victim when she was undergoing treatment for her injuries. She
testified that the Medical Board examined the deceased on 7-11-2004
and made the following findings:
(a) The deceased had sustained burns in her pubic region,
breasts, and the frontal area of her scalp;
(b) No foreign hair was found in the pubic region of the deceased;
(c) A pathological report based on a vaginal smear revealed that
there was no spermatozoa (living or dead) in the pubic region of the
deceased;
(d) A vaginal examination revealed that two fingers were
admitted easily; and
(e) The deceased had 14 upper and lower teeth, which were
incomplete. The pubic symphysis was 40%. An x-ray of her wrist
indicated that she was below 17 years.
13. Based on their examination and findings, the Medical Board was
of the opinion that:
(a) The deceased was about 16 years of age; and
(b) The possibility of intercourse could not be ruled out although
no definite opinion could be given in this regard.
The Medical Board's findings as well as its opinion was recorded in a
report prepared by Dr Minu Mukherjee. The other members of the
Medical Board affixed their signatures to this report.
14. In response to the questions posed to her during cross-
examination, Dr Minu Mukherjee stated that mobile sperm can be
spotted up to 72 hours after intercourse and non-mobile sperm can be
spotted up to 7-10 days after intercourse. She further stated that the
deceased may have engaged in intercourse prior to date of the alleged
crime, and that the admission of two fingers in her vagina meant that
she was habituated to sexual intercourse. She also denied the defence's
suggestion that she prepared the medical report because higher
ranking officials pressurised her to do so.
(d) Dr R. Mahto, PW 8
15. Dr R. Mahto, the Deputy Superintendent at Sadar Hospital,
testified that he conducted a post-mortem examination on the body of
the deceased on 14-12-2004 and made the following findings:
(a) The body had multiple ulcers scattered across it, with scabs on
the head, face and chest. These injuries were caused by deep burns
and were about six weeks old;
(b) Various dissections revealed that the skull was intact, the
brain matter was pale, the lungs were pale, the right chamber of the
heart contained blood and the left chamber was empty, the stomach
and the urinary bladder were empty. The liver, the spleen and the
kidneys were congested.
16. Based on his findings, Dr R. Mahto concluded that the victim's
death was caused by septicaemia, which was a result of the deep burn
injuries sustained by the victim. He recorded his findings and opinion in
a post-mortem report.
17. In response to the questions posed to him during cross-
examination, he stated that those who suffer from septicaemia may
experience a change in their mental state, due to which they may be
irritable and unresponsive upon
being asked any questions. He also stated that the doctor who was
treating the deceased referred her to Bokaro Burn Hospital.
(e) Suresh Yadav, PW 12
18. Suresh Yadav, a police officer at PS Sarwna, deposed that he
took over the investigation of the case from Lallan Prasad on 18-11-
2004. He submitted a charge-sheet under Section 173 CrPC for the
offences under Sections 307, 341, 376 and 448 IPC. When he learnt
that the victim died on 14-12-2004, he went to Sadar Hospital and
prepared an inquest report under Section 174 CrPC. Thereafter, he
received the post-mortem report and submitted a supplementary
charge-sheet against the respondent, with reference to Section 302
IPC.
(f) Rekha Dasgupta, PW 7
19. Rekha Dasgupta, a nurse at Sadar Hospital, was a witness to the
seizure list prepared by Lallan Prasad when the undergarments of the
deceased were seized.
(g) Hostile witnesses
20. The following witnesses initially supported the prosecution's case
but were later declared hostile:
(a) Parvati Devi, PW 1 (mother of the deceased);
(b) Bibhuti Bushan Ray, PW 2 (grandfather of the deceased);
(c) Mritunjay Ray, PW 3;
(d) Sanjay Kumar, PW 4;
(e) Sunil Kumar Roy, PW 5; and
(f) Bal Krishna Ray, PW 10.
(ii) An overview of the testimonies of the witnesses examined by
the defence
(a) Dhirendra Rai, DW 1
21. Dhirendra Rai, a resident of Narangi Village, deposed that a false
case had been instituted against the respondent and that one Kashi Rai
and the respondent had a disagreement concerning the irrigation of
certain land. He testified that he entered the house of the deceased and
saw that she was on fire but did not make an attempt to extinguish the
flames. According to him, none of the family members of the deceased
were present at the time.
22. In response to the questions posed to him during cross-
examination, he stated that he had not made a statement to the police
personnel who visited the village to investigate the crime.
(b) Dasrath Tiwary, DW 2
23. Dasrath Tiwary, a resident of Narangi Village, deposed that he
saw the deceased after she had sustained the burns, and that she was
not in a position to speak.
(c) Balmukund Rai, DW 3
24. Balmukund Rai, a resident of Narangi Village, testified that the
deceased sustained burns as a result of an accident while she was
cooking.
(iii) The decision of the Sessions Court
25. By its judgment dated 10-10-2006, the Sessions Court
convicted the respondent of the offences under Sections 302, 341, 376
and 448 IPC. By its order dated 11-10-2006, the Sessions Court
sentenced the respondent to rigorous imprisonment for life for the
offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and rigorous imprisonment
for 10 years for the offence punishable under Section 376 IPC. These
sentences were directed to run concurrently. A separate sentence was
not deemed to be required for the offences punishable under Sections
341 and 448 IPC.
26. The Sessions Court's conviction was based on its appreciation of
the evidence on record as well as the position of the law, in the
following terms:
26.1. The defence's averment that there was no certificate as to the
mental fitness of the declarant/deceased at the time of recording the
dying declaration was rejected because Dr R.K. Pandey had certified
that the deceased was mentally fit to make a statement.
26.2. The argument of the defence that the family members of the
deceased being declared hostile witnesses was fatal to the
prosecution's case was not accepted because it was not the
prosecution's case that the hostile witnesses were eyewitnesses to the
incident complained of. Instead, the hostile witnesses were sought to
be examined to establish that the deceased told her family members
that the accused raped her and set her on fire. The Sessions Court
noted that the hostile witnesses may have been persuaded not to
testify against the accused through bribes or because of threats to their
life or property. This fact alone would not prove fatal to the
prosecution's case.
26.3. There is no bar to a police officer recording a dying declaration.
26.4. PW 11's testimony that Dr B.K. Pandey certified that the
deceased was mentally and physically fit instead of Dr R.K. Pandey (PW
6) was a typographical error. Hence, the defence's suggestion that a
doctor named B.K. Pandey was on duty at Sadar Hospital and that he
refused to certify that the deceased was physically and mentally fit to
make a statement was rejected.
26.5. Dr R.K. Pandey's testimony that the deceased was in agony
does not lead to the conclusion that she was not fully conscious while
making a statement to the IO.
26.6. Dr Minu Mukherjee's testimony that she did not find any signs
of rape does not conclusively answer the question of whether the
respondent raped the deceased. Opinions of medical officers will not
discredit witnesses of fact.
26.7. The fact that the bottle seized from the place of the crime was
not sent for chemical analysis does not lead to the conclusion that the
respondent did not pour kerosene on the deceased.
27. The Sessions Court concluded that the dying declaration was
voluntary, credible, and did not suffer from any infirmities. It therefore
held that the prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable doubt,
and convicted the respondent of the offences punishable under Sections
302, 341, 376 and 448 IPC on the basis of the dying declaration.
(iv) The High Court's judgment on appeal
28. The respondent preferred an appeal before the High Court of
Jharkhand. By its judgment dated 27-1-2018 the High Court set aside
the judgment of the Sessions Court and acquitted the respondent, for
the following reasons:
28.1. The family members of the deceased were declared to be
hostile witnesses.
28.2. Dr R.K. Pandey stated in his examination-in-chief that the
dying declaration was recorded in his presence. However, he
contradicted himself during the cross-examination, where he stated
that he was with another patient in a room adjacent to the one in which
the deceased was being treated. Hence, the dying declaration was not
recorded in his presence.
28.3. In response to a question posed to him during cross-
examination, Dr R. Mahto stated that the victim's family had received
advice that the victim ought to be taken to Bokaro Burn Hospital for
better treatment but they did not do so.
28.4. The statement made by the deceased is not admissible as a
dying declaration due to the decision in Moti Singh V. State of U.P. 2
28.5. Dr Minu Mukherjee (PW 9) did not find any sign of sexual
intercourse when she examined the victim.
29. For these reasons, the High Court held that the prosecution had
failed to prove the charges against the respondent beyond reasonable
doubt. The appellant invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article
136 of the Constitution and challenged the decision of the High Court.
Notice was issued in these proceedings on 2-1-2019³.
B. Issues
30. Based on the submissions which have been canvassed on behalf
of the parties, two questions arise for determination:
30.1. (a) Whether the statement of the deceased is relevant under
Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act, 1872 ("the Evidence Act"); and
30.2. (b) Whether the prosecution has proved the charges against
the respondent beyond reasonable doubt.
C. Submissions
31. Mr Vishnu Sharma led arguments on behalf of the appellant. His
submissions were:
31.1. The High Court has not appreciated the evidence correctly : Dr
R.K. Pandey was attending to a patient on the table adjacent to the
deceased, and not to a patient in a room adjacent to the one in which
the deceased was present.
31.2. The post-mortem examination of the deceased was conducted
within 12 hours of the time of death. The post-mortem report
concluded that the cause of death was septicaemia due to the burn
injuries sustained bv her.
32. The submissions urged on behalf of the appellant have been
opposed by the respondent, whose counsel Mr Braj Kishore Mishra
made the following submissions:
32.1. Although the dying declaration indicates that the respondent
raped the deceased, the Medical Board's report stated that no definite
opinion could be given in this regard. There is no evidence other than
the dying declaration to show that the respondent raped the deceased.
32.2. The victim died around a month after the occurrence of the
incident complained of. The statement made by the deceased to the IO
is therefore not a dying declaration.
D. Analysis
(i) The statement of the deceased is relevant under Section 32
(1) of the Evidence Act, 1872
(a) The victim died due to the burn injuries sustained by her
33. The post-mortem report prepared by Dr R. Mahto (PW 8) states
that the cause of death of the victim was septicaemia, which was a
result of the burn injuries sustained by the victim. The defence has
sought to assail the veracity of this finding.
34. In response to a question posed to him during cross-
examination, Dr R. Mahto stated that he distinctly remembered that the
doctor who was treating the deceased referred her to Bokaro Burn
Hospital. However, she was not shifted to this hospital. The unnamed
doctor who supposedly referred the deceased to Bokaro Burn Hospital
was not named as a witness in the proceedings before the Sessions
Judge and was not called to depose in evidence. The counsel appearing
for the respondent in the proceedings before the High Court argued
that the fact that the deceased was not shifted to Bokaro Burn Hospital
was an intervening circumstance. He urged that consequently, it was
not proved that the deceased died because of her burn injuries. The
suggestion appears to be that the death of the victim could have been
prevented if the advice supposedly given by the unnamed doctor (to
shift her to Bokaro Burn Hospital) was heeded. As noted in the segment
on the High Court's decision, the High Court accepted this argument
and held that the statement of the deceased could not be treated as a
dying declaration since the cause of death was not established.
35. Dr R. Mahto's statement that another doctor referred the
deceased to Bokaro Burn Hospital is relied upon to urge that such a
reference did indeed take place, and that it was ignored. The counsel
for the defence seeks to rely on Dr R. Mahto's testimony to establish
that:
(a) An unnamed doctor examined the deceased;
(b) This doctor formed the opinion that the deceased ought to be
treated at Bokaro Burn Hospital;
(c) This doctor referred the deceased to Bokaro Burn Hospital;
(d) The deceased and her family ignored this advice; and
(e) The victim's death could have been prevented if she was
treated at Bokaro Burn Hospital instead of Sadar Hospital.
36. Dr R. Mahto's testimony (only to the limited extent that he seeks
to testify as to the opinion of another doctor who supposedly referred
the deceased to Bokaro Burn Hospital) is inadmissible in view of
Section 60 of the Evidence Act. Section 60 stipulates that oral evidence
must be direct:
"60. Oral evidence must be direct.-Oral evidence must, in all
cases, whatever, be direct; that is to say-
if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence
of a witness who says he saw it;
if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence
of a witness who says he heard it;
if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense
or in any other manner, it must be the evidence of a witness who
says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
if it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is
held, it must be the evidence of the person who holds that opinion
on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise
commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on which such opinions
are held, may be proved by the production of such treatises if the
author is dead or cannot be found; or has become incapable of
giving evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount
of delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or
condition of any material thing other than a document, the Court
may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for
its inspection."
(emphasis supplied)
37. Here, the fact that an unnamed doctor referred the deceased to
Bokaro Burn Hospital was sought to be established indirectly. The
unnamed doctor's opinion as to the best course of treatment for the
deceased was sought to be brought out through Dr R. Mahto's cross-
examination. This is impermissible due to the interdict in Section 60 of
the Evidence Act, in terms of which any oral evidence which refers to an
opinion must be the evidence of the person who holds that opinion. His
testimony (as to the limited point on whether the
victim was referred to Bokaro Burn Hospital by another doctor) is
therefore inadmissible and would amount to hearsay. However, his
testimony in his examination-in-chief as well as his other answers
during the cross-examination are not vitiated. His testimony refers to
his own opinion and the grounds on which he holds it. The remaining
portion of his testimony, including on the cause of death of the victim,
is no doubt admissible. Dr R. Mahto's testimony is clear that the cause
of death is septicaemia caused by the burn injuries sustained by the
victim.
38. The High Court relied on this Court's decision in Moti Singh2 to
reach the conclusion that the victim's statement was inadmissible as a
dying declaration. In that case, the accused was alleged to have shot
the victim. The victim was admitted to the hospital, treated for his
injuries, and discharged thereafter. He died a few weeks after having
sustained the gunshot wounds and he was cremated before a post-
mortem examination could be conducted. This Court held that there
was no evidence on record as to the cause of death of the victim.
Consequently, his statement was not considered a statement as to the
cause of his death or any of the circumstances of the transaction which
resulted in his death, under Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act. The
High Court's reliance on Moti Singh2 is misplaced because in the
present case, the post-mortem report establishes that the victim died
as a result of septicaemia caused by her burn injuries. Therefore, the
statement of the victim in the present case is indeed a statement
relevant as to the cause of her death and in regard to the
circumstances which eventually resulted in her death, as elaborated
upon in the subsequent segment.
(b) The statement of the deceased relates to the cause of her
death and the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in
her death
39. Section 32 of the Evidence Act provides that in certain cases,
statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses (and are
therefore unable to give direct evidence) are relevant. Dying
declarations are made relevant under sub-clause (1) of Section 32:
"32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person
who is dead or cannot be found, etc. is relevant.-Statements
written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or
who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving
evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an
amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances of the
case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant
facts in the following cases-
(1) When it relates to cause of death.-When the statement
is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of
the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death,
in cases in which the cause of that person's death comes into
question.
Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them
was or was not, at the time when they were made, under
expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question."
(emphasis supplied)
40. In terms of Section 32, statements (either written or verbal) of
relevant facts are themselves relevant facts when they are made by the
following classes of people:
(a) a person who is dead;
(b) a person who cannot be found;
(c) a person who is incapable of giving evidence; or
(d) a person whose attendance cannot be procured without an
amount of delay or expense.
41. Clause (1) indicates that in cases where the cause of a person's
death comes into question, a statement made by that person is
relevant when it relates to:
(a) the cause of death; or
(b) any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in
death.
42. In the present case, the statement satisfies the conditions laid
down in sub-clause (1) of Section 32 as it relates to both, the cause of
death as well as to the circumstances of the transaction which resulted
in death. This is because the statement clearly described that the
respondent poured kerosene on her and set her on fire. The post-
mortem report concludes that the cause of death is septicaemia caused
by the burn injuries sustained by the deceased. The statement of the
deceased indicates that she sustained the burn injuries as a result of
the respondent having poured kerosene on her and setting her on fire.
43. In addition, the statement of the deceased discloses that the
respondent raped her before setting her on fire - this is a description
of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in her death. The
statement of the deceased, therefore, satisfies the conditions in Section
32(1) and is itself a relevant fact. It shall be considered to be a dying
declaration for the purpose of adjudicating this appeal.
(c) The admissibility and probative value of the dying
declaration
44. There is no rule to the effect that a dying declaration is
inadmissible when it is recorded by a police officer instead of a
Magistrate4 Although a dying declaration ought to ideally be recorded
by a Magistrate if possible, it cannot be said that dying declarations
recorded by police personnel are inadmissible for that reason alone. The
issue of whether a dying declaration recorded by the police is
admissible must be decided after considering the facts and
circumstances of each case.
45. In Khushal Rao V. State of Bombay5, this Court formulated the
yardstick against which dying declarations may be evaluated : (AIR pp.
28-29, para 16)
"16.
(1) that it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law
that a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction
unless it is corroborated;
(2) that each case must be determined on its own facts keeping
in view the circumstances in which the dying declaration was made;
(3) that it cannot be laid down as a general proposition that a
dying declaration is a weaker kind of evidence than other pieces of
evidence;
(4) that a dying declaration stands on the same footing as
another piece of evidence and has to be judged in the light of
surrounding circumstances and with reference to the principles
governing the weighing of evidence;
(5) that a dying declaration which has been recorded by a
competent Magistrate in the proper manner, that is to say, in the
form of questions and answers, and, as far as practicable, in the
words of the maker of the declaration, stands on a much higher
footing than a dying declaration which depends upon oral testimony
which may suffer from all the infirmities of human memory and
human character, and
(6) that in order to test the reliability of a dying declaration, the
court has to keep in view, the circumstances like the opportunity of
the dying man for observation, for example, whether there was
sufficient light if the crime was committed at night; whether the
capacity of the man to remember the facts stated, had not been
impaired at the time he was making the statement, by
circumstances beyond his control; that the statement has been
consistent throughout if he had several opportunities of making a
dying declaration apart from the official record of it; and that the
statement had been made at the earliest opportunity and was not
the result of tutoring by interested parties."
46. The fact that the dying declaration is not in the form of
questions and answers does not impact either its admissibility or its
p. 522, para 9)
"9.
Generally, the dying declaration ought to be recorded in the
form of questions and answers but if a dying declaration is not
elaborate but consists of only a few sentences and is in the actual
words of the maker the mere fact that it is not in question-answer
form cannot be a ground against its acceptability or reliability."
47. Indeed, as recognised by this Court in Surinder Kumar V. State
of Punjab 7 it may not always be possible to record dying declarations in
"19. Insofar as the case before us is concerned, we may only note
that there is no format prescribed for recording a dying declaration.
Indeed, no such format can be prescribed. Therefore, it is not
obligatory that a dying declaration should be recorded in a question-
answer form. There may be occasions when it is possible to do so
and others when it may not be possible to do so either because of
the prevailing situation or because of the pain and agony that the
victim might be suffering at that point of time."
48. In its judgment, the High Court incorrectly observed that in his
cross-examination, Dr R.K. Pandey stated that he was examining
another patient in the adjacent room when the victim's dying
declaration was recorded. The record of the cross-examination indicates
that Dr R.K. Pandey stated that he was examining a patient on the
adjacent table (not in the adjacent room as erroneously stated by the
High Court). The High Court mistakenly relied on this fact to hold that
the victim's statement could not be treated as her dying declaration. Dr
R.K. Pandey's answer to the question he was asked during cross-
examination makes it clear that the dying declaration cannot be
rejected on the ground that he was in another room when it was
recorded - he was evidently in the same room and the dying
declaration was recorded by Lallan Prasad in his presence. Both Lallan
Prasad and Dr R.K. Pandey have attested to this fact during their
examination(s).
49. Dr R.K. Pandey was also satisfied that the deceased was
physically and mentally fit to make a statement, and certified the same
in writing. The dying declaration was recorded in the victim's words and
read out to her, after which she affixed her signature to it. We have no
reason to believe that the statement was a result of tutoring or that the
deceased was incapable of making a statement. Nothing on the record
indicates that there was any enmity between the deceased and the
respondent, which would lead the deceased to narrate an untrue
account of events and falsely implicate the respondent.
50. Further, Lallan Prasad was unable to remember whether the
deceased was admitted in the general ward or the ICU. This fact does
not impeach the authenticity of the dying declaration because Dr R.K.
Pandey has testified that it was recorded in his presence.
51. We are therefore satisfied that the dying declaration was made
voluntarily and is true. The deceased was in a competent state of mind
when she made a statement to Lallan Prasad.
(ii) The prosecution has proved its case against the respondent
beyond reasonable doubt
52. The dying declaration makes it abundantly clear that the
respondent raped the deceased, poured kerosene on her, and set her on
fire. The cause of death was septicaemia, which occurred as a result of
the burn injuries. Hence, the victim's death was a direct result of the
injuries inflicted upon her by the respondent. There is nothing on record
which gives rise to reasonable doubt as to the respondent's guilt.
53. The learned counsel for the respondent has urged that the
Medical Board did not find any evidence of rape and that the
respondent is therefore not guilty of raping the deceased. The report
prepared by the Medical Board stated that the possibility of intercourse
could not be ruled out although no definite opinion could be given in
this regard. A lack of medical evidence as to the commission of rape
cannot be taken to mean that no rape was committed upon the
deceased. Her dying declaration unequivocally states that the
respondent raped her before setting her on fire and there is no rule
mandating the corroboration of the dying declaration through medical
or other evidence, when the dying declaration is not otherwise
suspicious.
54. In Vishnu V. State of Maharashtra8, this Court held that a
medical expert's opinion is not conclusive as to the existence of any
"20.
The opinion of the Medical Officer is to assist the court as
he is not a witness of fact and the evidence given by the Medical
Officer is really of an advisory character and not binding on the
witness of fact."
55. In State of U.P. V. Ram Sagar Yadav9 this Court held that there
is neither a rule of law nor a rule of prudence that a dying declaration
13)
"13. It is well settled that, as a matter of law, a dying declaration
can be acted upon without corroboration. (See Khushal Rao V. State
of Bombay5; Harbans Singh V. State of Punjab10, Gopalsingh V.
State of M.P.¹ There is not even a rule of prudence which has
hardened into a rule of law that a dying declaration cannot be acted
upon unless it is corroborated. The primary effort of the court has to
be to find out whether the dying declaration is true. If it is, no
question of corroboration arises. It is only if the circumstances
surrounding the dying declaration are not clear or convincing that
the court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration to the dying
declaration."
56. PWs 1 to 5 and PW 10 (being the family members of the
deceased and other persons known to her) were declared hostile during
the proceedings in
the Sessions Court. It is common for witnesses to turn hostile after the
death of the victim (or even prior to it) for a variety of reasons. In
Ramesh V. State of Haryana12, , this Court noted some of the factors
44 & 48)
"44. On the analysis of various cases, the following reasons can be
discerned which make witnesses retracting their statements before
the court and turning hostile:
(i) Threat/Intimidation.
(ii) Inducement by various means.
(iii) Use of muscle and money power by the accused.
(iv) Use of stock witnesses.
(v) Protracted trials.
(vi) Hassles faced by the witnesses during investigation and
trial.
(vii) Non-existence of any clear-cut legislation to check hostility
of witness.
*
*
*
48. Apart from the above, another significant reason for witnesses
turning hostile may be what is described as "culture of compromise".
Commenting upon such culture in rape trials, Pratiksha Bakshi13 13 has
highlighted this problem in the following manner:
The normalising function of the socio-legal category of
compromise converts terror into a bargain in a context where there is
no witness protection programme. This often accounts for why
prosecution witnesses routinely turn hostile by the time the case
comes on trial, if the victim does not lose the will to live.'
57. In addition to these factors, witnesses who know the deceased
victim may turn hostile because they wish to move on with their lives.
Testifying as to the circumstances surrounding the rape and death of a
loved one can be a deeply traumatising event, which is only
compounded by the slow pace of the criminal justice system.
58. That certain witnesses including the family members of the
deceased were declared hostile is insufficient to cast doubt upon the
prosecution's case. It was not the prosecution's case that the hostile
witnesses were eyewitnesses to the crime. Rather, these witnesses'
testimonies were relevant mainly to show that the deceased
consistently stated that the respondent raped and murdered her, to
different persons. The absence of evidence which establishes the
consistency of the dying declaration over a period of time is not fatal to
the prosecution's case. As noted previously, the dying declaration was
recorded in the victim's words and read out to her, after which she
affixed her signature on it.
59. Dhirendra Rai (DW 1) testified that a false case had been
instituted against the respondent but failed to provide a convincing
reason for his opinion. We are not persuaded that a small disagreement
regarding the irrigation of land would prompt the deceased to falsify
rape charges against the respondent or lie about his having set her on
fire, especially when she was not party to the alleged disagreement
about the irrigation of land.
60. Dasrath Tiwary (DW 2) deposed that the deceased was unable to
speak after she was burnt. This is patently false as established by the
testimonies of both Lallan Prasad and Dr R.K. Pandey. Dr R.K. Pandey
certified that the deceased was physically and mentally fit, and was
present while her statement was recorded by Lallan Prasad. Dr R.K.
Pandey did not have any animus towards the respondent, nor has the
defence suggested that he did. He had no reason to give false
testimony regarding the victim's health, or to give a false certificate of
fitness at the time her statement was recorded.
61. Balmukund Rai (DW 3) testified that the deceased was injured
while cooking. We find this to be wholly unconvincing. Nothing emerges
from the record which suggests that the deceased had any reason to
concoct a story implicating the respondent. Further, nothing suggests
that Balmukund Rai was present in the victim's home when the
supposed accident took place. If he did witness the accident, it begs
the question of where he went when Dhirendra Rai supposedly entered
the victim's house. The dying declaration has greater probative value
than Balmukund Rai's testimony and we are inclined to accept the
version of events narrated in the former.
62. For these reasons, we find that the prosecution proved its case
beyond reasonable doubt before the Sessions Court. The High Court
ought not to have overturned the Sessions Court's judgment for the
reasons discussed previously. While this Court does not ordinarily
interfere with orders of acquittal passed by High Courts, it may exercise
its power to do complete justice and reverse orders of acquittal to avert
a miscarriage of justice. 14 We therefore set aside the High Court's
decision dated 27-1-2018 and restore the Sessions Court's judgment
dated 10-10-2006 convicting the respondent of the offences punishable
under Sections 302, 341, 376 and 448 IPC, as well as its order dated
11-10-2006 sentencing the respondent to rigorous imprisonment for
life for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years for the offence punishable under Section 376
IPC. These sentences are to run concurrently. The respondent shall be
taken into custody to serve the sentence immediately.
E. Parting remarks
While examining the victim, the Medical Board conducted what
is known as the "two-finger test" to determine whether she was
habituated to sexual intercourse. This Court has time and again
deprecated the use of this regressive and invasive test in cases alleging
rape and sexual assault. This so-called test has no scientific basis and
neither proves nor disproves allegations of rape. It instead re-victimises
and re-traumatises women who may have been sexually assaulted, and
is an affront to their dignity. The "two-finger test" or per vaginum test
must not be conducted.
64. In Lillu V. State of Haryana 15 this Court held that the "two-
pp. 648-49, paras 13-14)
"13.
rape survivors are entitled to legal recourse that does not
re-traumatise them or violate their physical or mental integrity and
dignity. They are also entitled to medical procedures conducted in a
manner that respects their right to consent. Medical procedures
should not be carried out in a manner that constitutes cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment and health should be of paramount
consideration while dealing with gender-based violence. The State is
under an obligation to make such services available to survivors of
sexual violence. Proper measures should be taken to ensure their
safety and there should be no arbitrary or unlawful interference with
their privacy.
14. Thus, in view of the above, undoubtedly, the two-finger test
and its interpretation violates the right of rape survivors to privacy,
physical and mental integrity and dignity."
65. Whether a woman is "habituated to sexual intercourse" or
"habitual to sexual intercourse" is irrelevant for the purposes of
determining whether the ingredients of Section 375 IPC are present in
a particular case. The so-called test is based on the incorrect
assumption that a sexually active woman cannot be raped. Nothing
could be further from the truth - a woman's sexual history is wholly
immaterial while adjudicating whether the accused raped her. Further,
the probative value of a woman's testimony does not depend upon her
sexual history. It is patriarchal and sexist to suggest that a woman
cannot be believed when she states that she was raped, merely for the
reason that she is sexually active.
66. The legislature explicitly recognised this fact when it enacted the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 which inter alia amended the
Evidence Act to insert Section 53-A. In terms of Section 53-A of the
Evidence Act, evidence of a victim's character or of her previous sexual
experience with any person shall not be relevant to the issue of consent
or the quality of consent, in prosecutions of sexual offences.
67. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued guidelines for
health providers in cases of sexual violence¹6. These guidelines
proscribe the application of the "two-finger test":
"Per vaginum examination commonly referred to by lay persons as
"two-finger test", must not be conducted for establishing
rape/sexual violence and the size of the vaginal introitus has no
bearing on a case of sexual violence. Per vaginum examination can
be done only in adult women when medically indicated.
The status of hymen is irrelevant because the hymen can be torn
due to several reasons such as cycling, riding or masturbation
among other things. An intact hymen does not rule out sexual
violence, and a torn hymen does not prove previous sexual
intercourse. Hymen should therefore be treated like any other part of
the genitals while documenting examination findings in cases of
sexual violence. Only those that are relevant to the episode of
assault (findings such as fresh tears, bleeding, oedema, etc.) are to
be documented."
68. Although the "two-finger test" in this case was conducted over a
decade ago, it is a regrettable fact that it continues to be conducted
even today.
69. We direct the Union Government as well as the State
Governments to:
69.1. Ensure that the guidelines formulated by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare are circulated to all government and private
hospitals.
69.2. Conduct workshops for health providers to communicate the
appropriate procedure to be adopted while examining survivors of
sexual assault and rape.
69.3. Review the curriculum in medical schools with a view to
ensuring that the "two-finger test" or per vaginum examination is not
prescribed as one of the procedures to be adopted while examining
survivors of sexual assault and rape.
70. A copy of this judgment shall be shared with the Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. The
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India
shall transmit copies of this judgment to the Principal Secretary
(Department of Public Health) of each State. The Principal Secretaries
in the Departments of Health of each State shall also be responsible for
ensuring the implementation of the directions issued in Part E of this
judgment. The Secretaries in the Departments of Home of each State
shall in addition issue directions to the Directors General of Police in
this regard. The Directors General of Police shall, in turn, communicate
these directions to the Superintendents of Police.
71. Any person who conducts the "two-finger test" or per vaginum
examination (while examining a person alleged to have been subjected
to a sexual assault) in contravention of the directions of this Court shall
be guilty of misconduct.
72. The appeal is allowed in the above terms. Pending application
(s), if any, stand disposed of.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Shailendra Kumar Rai V. State of Jharkhand
(Jharkhand High Court, Criminal Appeal No. 1533 of 2006, dt. 27-1-2018) [Reversed]
1
Shailendra Kumar Rai V. State of Jharkhand, Criminal Appeal No. 1533 of 2006, order dated
27-1-2018 (Jhar)
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
1962 SC 439
11
13 "Justice is a Secret : Compromise in Rape Trials" (2010) 44, Issue 3, Contributions to
Indian Sociology, pp. 207-33.
15
16
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, "Medico-legal care for
survivors/victims of sexual violence" (19-3-2014)