In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE SURYA KANT AND J.B. PARDIWALA, JJ.)
SATISH CHANDRA YADAV
Appellant;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeals No. 6955 of 2022 with No. 6956 of 2022 , decided
on September 26, 2022
A. Service Law - Appointment - Eligibility conditions/criteria
-
Character/Antecedents - Verification of character and antecedents -
Suppression of relevant information or submission of false information in
verification form in regard to criminal prosecution, conviction, arrest or
pendency of criminal case(s) by candidate/employee - Effect of, on
appointment - Law summarised
- On facts held, respondent UoI was justified in terminating services of
appellants (CRPF employees), for suppression of relevant information pertaining to
pendency of criminal cases filed against them in antecedent and verification form at
time of recruitment
- Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 - Rr. 14 and 27 and Form 25 -
CCS (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 - R. 5(1) - Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 147,
323, 324, 504, 325 and 506 - Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949, S. 11(1)
B. Constitution of India - Art. 136 - Nature and scope of Art. 136 -
Discretionary power - Exercise of - Essentials for - To be exercised
sparingly in : (i) Exceptional and special circumstances; (ii) Where
substantial and grave injustice has been occasioned; and (iii) Where case
presents features of sufficient gravity warranting interference
C. Administrative Law - Judicial Review - Judicial Review of
Administrative Action - Review of discretionary decision - Scope -
Principles reiterated
- Held, discretionary decisions of administrative authorities can be reviewed
only on limited grounds such as bad faith of decision-makers, exercise of discretion
for improper purpose, application of irrelevant considerations
and
"unreasonableness" - Further held, discretionary decisions like other administrative
decisions must be made within limits of jurisdiction conferred by statutory rules
though due deference would be given to decisions of decision-maker while
reviewing exercise of that discretion and determining scope of jurisdiction -
Intention of legislature in conferring discretionary powers on administrative
authorities should not be lightly interfered with
(Para 102)
SLP (Civil) No. 20860 of 2019
Appellant probationer Constable (GD) in CRPF was dismissed from service on 11
-3-2016 under Rule 5(1) of the CCS (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 for
suppression of information in character and antecedents verification form at time of
recruitment pertaining to pendency of criminal case filed against him for the
offences punishable under Sections 147, 323, 324, 504 and 506 IPC. Writ petition
filed thereagainst was dismissed by the impugned judgment. Hence, instant appeal.
SLP (Civil) No. 5170 of 2021
Appellant SI/GD in CRPF was dismissed from service on 23-9-2016 for
suppression of information in character and antecedents verification form at time of
recruitment, regarding pendency of criminal case for offences punishable under
Sections 147, 149, 323, 325, 504, 506 and 507 IPC registered against him. Writ
petition filed thereagainst was dismissed by the impugned judgment. Hence, the
instant appeal.
Dismissing the appeals, the Supreme Court
Held :
On review of a catena of decisions rendered by the Supreme Court on issue
pertaining to dismissal/termination of services of employee for suppression of
material information or furnishing of false information in character and antecedent
verification form at the time of recruitment, broad principles of applicable law are
enumerated below:
(1) Each case should be scrutinised thoroughly by the public employer
concerned, through its designated officials - more so, in the case of recruitment
for the Police Force, who are under a duty to maintain order, and tackle
lawlessness, since their ability to inspire public confidence is bulwark to society's
security.
(2) Even in a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully and
correctly of a concluded criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider
the antecedents, and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate. The
acquittal in a criminal case would not automatically entitle a candidate for
appointment to the post. It would be still open to the employer to consider the
antecedents and examine whether the candidate concerned is suitable and fit for
appointment to the post.
(3) The suppression of material information and making a false statement in
the verification form relating to arrest, prosecution, conviction, etc. has a clear
bearing on the character, conduct and antecedents of the employee. If it is
found that the employee had suppressed or given false information in regard to
the matters having a bearing on his fitness or suitability to the post, he can be
terminated from service.
(4) The generalisations about the youth, career prospects and age of the
candidates leading to condonation of the offenders' conduct, should not enter
the judicial verdict and should be avoided.
(5) The Court should inquire : whether the authority concerned whose action
is being challenged acted mala fide, or there was any element of bias in decision
of authority, and whether the enquiry procedure adopted was fair and
reasonable.
(para 93)
:
V.
:
490, considered
Methu Meda V. Union of India, Writ Petition No. 3897 of 2013, order dated 27-9-
referred to
V. Union of India, Writ Appeal No. 223 of 2018, order dated 25-3-2019 (Ori);
As far as jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under Article 136 is
concerned, it is divisible into two stages : the first stage is up to the disposal of
prayer for the special leave to file an appeal and the second stage commences, if
and when, the leave to appeal is granted and the special leave petition is converted
into an appeal. However, unless it is shown that exceptional and special
circumstances
exist; that grave and substantial injustice has been done; and the case presents
features of sufficient gravity to warrant review of decision appealed against, the
Supreme Court would refrain from exercising overriding powers under Article 136.
The wide discretionary powers conferred should be exercised sparingly and in
exceptional circumstances only.
(Paras 94 to 99)
Benjamin Cardozo : The Nature of The Judicial Process (Yale University Press,
1921), referred to
Insofar as the appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 20860 of
2019 filed by S is concerned, the same should fail. Indisputably, S was still under
probation at the time his services had been terminated and his appointment on
probation was subject to the verification of facts given in the verification form.
Thus, if an enquiry revealed that the facts given were wrong, the respondent herein
was at liberty to dispense with the services of the appellant S as the question of
any stigma and penal consequences at this stage would not arise. He could be said
to have exhibited or displayed such a tendency which shook the confidence of the
respondent. There was a deliberate attempt on the part of the appellant S to
withhold the relevant information and it is this omission which has led to the
termination of his service during the probation period.
(Paras 101 and 104)
So far as connected appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 5170 of 2021 filed by P is
concerned, same also fails on same line of reasoning. The only difference in case of
P is that he had put in about four years of service before he was terminated.
(Para 106)
P-D/69973/CL
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Ms Jyoti Dutta Sharma, Ms Jaikriti S. Jadeja (Advocate-on-Record),
Himanshu Gautam, M.M. Singh, Jitendra Kumar and Rameshwar Prasad
Goyal (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates, for the Appellant;
Ms Madhavi Divan, Additional Solicitor General [Arvind Kr. Sharma
(Advocate-on-Record) and B.V. Balaram Das (Advocate-on-Record) (not
present), Advocates], for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Union of India V. Dilip Kumar Mallick
568b, 568c-d
Pawan Kumar V. Union of India
569a-b, 569b-c
India V. Methu Meda
545e-f, 567b-c, 567c-d
Prasaran Nigam Ltd. V. Anil Kanwariya
569f-g, 570d, 571a
of Rajasthan V. Love Kush Meena
566e-f
V. Raj Kumar
544g, 573g
State of M.P. V. Bunty
566d
Yadav V. Union of India
547b, 548e
Maharashtra
572e
Maharashtra
573c
Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Ltd.
574g-h
Yadav V. Union of India
541g, 542f-g
Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd. V. Anil Kanwariya
570c-d
Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd.
570c
15. Writ Appeal No. 223 of 2018, order dated 25-3-
2019 (Ori), Dillip Kumar Mallick V. Union of India
569a
Chandigarh) V. Pradeep Kumar
565f, 565f-g
Yadav V. Union of India
542e
State of Maharashtra
571d, 573b
Avtar Singh V. Union of India
548g, 560e-f, 562e-f,
562f-g, 563e, 564b,
565e-f, 566f-g, 567a-b,
567d-e, 568b-c, 569f,
572g, 573f
State of M.P. V. Parvez Khan
566a
Joginder Singh V. UT of Chandigarh
572d
Union of India (held, overruled)
569b-c
Mehar Singh
560e-f, 560g, 565f-g, 566a
Police V. S. Samuthiram
560g-h
Methu Meda (held, overruled)
567c
26. Writ Petition No. 3897 of 2013, order dated 27-9-
2013 (MP), Methu Meda V. Union of India (held,
overruled)
567c
Jainendra Singh V. State of U.P.
559a, 560c, 562e-f
Sandeep Kumar
558c, 558e, 558f-g
Daya Shankar Yadav V. Union of India
556e-f, 558a-b
Kamal Nayan Mishra V. State of M.P.
554f-g, 554g, 555b
Union of India V. Bipad Bhanjan Gayen
555d-e
of Haryana V. Dinesh Kumar
555g
M.V. Thimmaiah V. UPSC
545a
Radhakrishnan V. DG of Police
555c
State of Haryana
556b-c, 556c, 556d-e
Commr. of Police
558d-e
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan V. Ram Ratan
554b-c, 554f-g, 554g,
Yadav
579b-c
Kerala
574g-h, 575a
Admn. V. Sushil Kumar
554a-b
Kumar V. State of Haryana
571g-h
Union of India V. M. Bhaskaran
553c-d, 554a-b
Bhopal Singh Panchal
561a-b
Sadhanantham V. Arunachalam
576e-f
State of Ajmer
576c
575e
576a
47. 1914 AC 599, Ibrahim V. R.
575g-h
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. - Leave granted. Since the issues raised in both
the captioned matters are almost the same and the principles of law
applicable are also common, those were taken up for hearing
analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment and
order.
2. We first take up the appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 20860 of 2019.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 20860 of 2019
3. This appeal is at the instance of an unsuccessful writ applicant of
a writ application being Writ Petition (C) No. 1167 of 2018 filed in the
High Court of Delhi and is directed against the judgment and order
dated 15-4-2019 1 by which a Division Bench of the High Court rejected
the writ application filed by the writ applicant (appellant herein)
thereby affirming the dismissal of the appellant herein from service as a
Constable (General Duty) with the CRPF.
4. The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under.
5. The appellant herein was serving as a Constable (General Duty)
with the CRPF. He was recruited as a temporary employee of the post of
Constable (GD) in the CRPF on 28-7-2014. After undergoing the basic
training, he reported at the 179th Battalion on 17-12-2015.
6. While filling up the requisite verification Form 25 at the time of
his recruitment in the CRPF in Column 12 in response to the question
whether any case was pending against him, the appellant answered in
the negative.
7. Thereafter, under Rule 14 of the CRPF Rules, the character and
antecedents verification form of the appellant was sent to the Collector,
District Sant Kabir Nagar, Uttar Pradesh. The Collector, vide his letter
dated 25-2-2015, informed the Deputy Inspector General of Police
("DIGP"), Group Centre, CRPF, Rampur that Criminal Case No. 1015 of
2008 had been registered against the appellant herein at PS Khalilabad,
Sant Kabir Nagar, Police Station for the offences punishable under
Sections 147, 323, 324, 504 and 506, respectively, of the Penal Code,
1860 (for short "IPC"). Upon receipt of the information as aforesaid, the
services of the appellant herein came to be terminated in exercise of
the powers conferred under Rule 5(1) of the Central Civil Services
(Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 vide the order dated 11-3-2016 on
the ground that he had concealed the information as aforesaid while
filling up Form 25.
8. The further appeal addressed by the appellant herein to the
Inspector General ("IG") was also dismissed.
9. The appellant herein challenged his dismissal from service by
filing Writ Petition (C) No. 10558 of 2016 in the High Court of Delhi.
The said writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of the High
Court on 25-9-2017 remitting the matter to the revisionary authority
for fresh consideration within a period of six weeks from the date the
appellant herein would make a representation.
10. The representation filed by the appellant herein ultimately came
to be rejected and a fresh order dated 5-1-2018 reiterating the
termination of the appellant's services was passed.
11. The appellant herein once again preferred a fresh Writ Petition
(C) No. 1167 of 2018 challenging the impugned order dated 5-1-2018
terminating his services.
12. The High Court rejected the writ petition vide order dated 15-4-
paras 9 & 11-12)
"9. The fact remains that FIR No. 1015/2008 was registered at PS
Khalilabad against the petitioner and placed under Sections
147/323/324/504/506 IPC. Admittedly, the petitioner got bail in the
above criminal case which was for cognizable offences. It is not
therefore the case where the time of filing up of the verification Form
25 the petitioner was not aware of the pendency of the criminal case
against him.
*
*
*
11. In the present case, on the date of filling up of the verification
form the criminal case against the petitioner was very much
pending. The fact that the charge-sheet had been filed after the
filling up the form will not make any difference to the fact that the
petitioner deliberately gave a wrong answer to the question whether
any case was pending against the petitioner. This could not be
termed as innocent. The petitioner is applying for the post of
Constable in a paramilitary organisation and is expected to be
truthful in all responses to the columns in the verification form. At
the time of filling up of that form the petitioner was very much
aware of the pendency of the criminal case. Therefore, there could be
no excuse for not filling up the correct answer in response to the
question under Column 12.
12. For the aforementioned reasons, the Court finds no reason to
interfere with the impugned order of the DA which was confirmed by
the AA."
13. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here
before this Court with the present appeal.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant
14. Ms Jyoti Dutt Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the
appellant vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a
serious error in passing the impugned order. She would submit that the
prosecution against the appellant was of a very trivial nature. It did not
involve any moral turpitude. The suppression, if at all believed, by
itself, cannot be a ground to deny public employment. It was argued
that the appellant had no knowledge of the pendency of the criminal
case on the date when the verification form was filled up. She
submitted that for the purpose of determining whether the suppression
was with a guilty mind, the attestation/verification form should be very
specific and not vague so as to confuse the person filling up such
forms. It was further argued that at the relevant point of time, the
appellant was 19 years of age. The criminal prosecution against him
along with the others was on account of a family dispute. The appellant
had been falsely arrayed as an accused in the said case. There was a
settlement between the parties before the local village panchayat.
Ultimately, the appellant herein along with the other co-accused came
to be acquitted by the trial court.
15. The learned counsel placed strong reliance on the decision of this
Court in Avtar Singh V. Union of India ³ to fortify her submission that
while passing the order of termination of services for giving false
information, the employer must take notice of the special
circumstances of the case, if any. The High Court, in the first round of
litigation, had taken notice of such non-application of mind and thought
fit to remit the case for fresh consideration. It was argued that even
upon fresh consideration, the authority committed the very same
mistake while reiterating the termination.
16. In the last, the learned counsel submitted that the High Court
failed to consider an important question of fact that Form CRP 25 was
quite vague and not specific about the information in regard to the
criminal antecedents. It is on account of such vagueness that the
appellant was not able to understand the question in a proper manner
and answered the same accordingly which is now being treated as false
information.
17. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel
prays that there being merit in her appeal, the same may be allowed
and the impugned order passed by the High Court may be set aside
and the appellant may be ordered to be reinstated in service with full
back wages.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent
18. On the other hand, this appeal has been vehemently opposed by
Ms Madhavi Divan, the Additional Solicitor General ("ASG") submitting
that no error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said to have
been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order. She
would submit that the appellant is guilty of "suppression" of material
facts which, by itself, was sufficient to terminate his services. It was
argued that the services of the appellant herein were terminated
because he was found guilty of submitting false information or to put in
other words, guilty of suppression of material facts. The learned ASG
vehemently submitted that the appellant herein not only suppressed
information about his arrest but also suppressed the information about
the criminal case which was pending against him at the time he filled
up the verification form.
19. The learned ASG further submitted that the appellant herein and
the other co-accused were not honourably acquitted. They all came to
be acquitted as the prosecution witnesses turned hostile. The learned
ASG, while relying on the decision of this Court in Avtar Singh more
concerned is duty-bound to take into account the gravity of the offence
in a situation where acquittal is not recorded at the time of filling up of
the verification form.
20. It was argued that in a disciplined force which seeks to maintain
high standards of integrity the suppression of material facts cannot be
countenanced.
21. In the last, the learned ASG submitted that the judicial review
under Article 136 of the Constitution in matters pertaining to the
suitability of a candidate is limited to the extent of determining if the
authority concerned had acted with malice, mindlessness or gross
illegality. She placed strong reliance on the decision of this Court in
State V. Raj Kumar4 to fortify her submission that the scope of judicial
review in the matters of the present type is very limited. She placed
359-61, paras 28 & 31)
"28. Courts exercising judicial review cannot second guess the
suitability of a candidate for any public office or post. Absent
evidence of malice or mindlessness (to the materials), or illegality by
the public
employer, an intense scrutiny on why a candidate is excluded as
unsuitable renders the courts' decision suspect to the charge of
trespass into executive power of determining suitability of an individual
for appointment. This was emphasised by this Court in M.V. Thimmaiah
`21. Now, comes the question with regard to the selection of
the candidates. Normally, the recommendations of the Selection
Committee cannot be challenged except on the ground of mala
fides or serious violation of the statutory rules. The courts cannot
sit as an appellate authority to examine the recommendations of
the Selection Committee like the court of appeal. This discretion
has been given to the Selection Committee only and courts rarely
sit as a court of appeal to examine the selection of the candidates
nor is the business of the court to examine each candidate and
record its opinion.
,
*
*
*
31. Public service - like any other, presupposes that the State
employer has an element of latitude or choice on who should enter
its service. Norms, based on principles, govern essential aspects
such as qualification, experience, age, number of attempts permitted
to a candidate, etc. These broadly constitute eligibility conditions
required of each candidate or applicant aspiring to enter public
service. Judicial review, under the Constitution, is permissible to
ensure that those norms are fair and reasonable, and applied fairly,
in a non-discriminatory manner. However, suitability is entirely
different; the autonomy or choice of the public employer, is greatest,
as long as the process of decision-making is neither illegal, unfair, or
lacking in bona fides."
22. The learned ASG also placed strong reliance on the decision of
this Court in Union of India V. Methu Meda6 more particularly, in the
"17. In view of the above, in the facts of the present case, as per
paras 38.3, 38.4.3 and 38.5 of Avtar Singh case3 it is clear that the
employer is having right to consider the suitability of the candidate
as per government orders/instructions/rules at the time of taking the
decision for induction of the candidate in employment. Acquittal on
technical ground in respect of the offences of heinous/serious nature,
which is not a clean acquittal, the employer may have a right to
consider all relevant facts available as to the antecedents, and may
take appropriate decision as to the continuance of the employee.
Even in case, truthful declaration regarding concluded trial has been
made by the employee, still the employer has the right to consider
antecedents and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate."
23. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned ASG
prayed that there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be
dismissed.
Analysis
24. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
having gone through the materials on record, the only question that
falls for our consideration is : whether the High Court committed any
error in passing the impugned order?
25. The following facts are not in dispute:
25.1. The verification form was filled up by the appellant on 2-9-
2014.
25.2. A first information report was registered against the appellant
herein and others on 26-5-2008 for the offences punishable under
Sections 147, 148, 323, 324, 504 and 506, respectively, of the IPC.
25.3. Upon registration of the FIR on 26-5-2008, the appellant
herein filed two applications in the Court of the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Sant Kabir Nagar, one application seeking to surrender
himself before the court in connection with the FIR referred to above
and the second application seeking for regular bail.
25.4. It appears that the appellant upon surrendering before the
Chief Judicial Magistrate was taken in deemed judicial custody with
effect from 6-6-2008 and was ordered to be released on bail on 10-6-
2008. It appears that the appellant was not actually put behind bars as
asserted by the appellant.
25.5. At the end of the investigation, the investigating officer filed
charge-sheet in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate which
culminated in Criminal Case No. 1015 of 2008. The appellant herein
and the other co-accused were put to trial and vide the judgment and
order dated 13-1-2016 passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, District
Sant Kabir Nagar came to be acquitted.
25.6. At the time when the services of the appellant came to be
terminated, he was a probationer.
25.7. In the verification form, more particularly in Clause 12, the
following questions are to be found:
"(a) Have you ever been arrested?
Yes/No
(b) Have you ever been prosecuted?
Yes/No
(c) Have you ever been kept under detention
Yes/No
*
*
*
(i) Is any case pending against you in any court of law
Yes/No
at the time of filling up this verification roll?"
26. Against all the aforesaid questions, the appellant put a tick on
"NO", as above.
27. The authority concerned reached to the conclusion that the
appellant had not only suppressed the fact that an FIR was registered
against him but also suppressed the fact that he had surrendered
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate who, in turn, had released him on
regular bail. He also suppressed the fact that there was Criminal Case
No. 1015 of 2008 registered against him and pending in the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate for the offences enumerated above.
28. In such circumstances, a notice was issued to the appellant
herein to show cause as to why his services should not be terminated.
Upon conclusion of the enquiry the appellant ultimately came to be
dismissed from service.
29. We now look into the connected appeal arising out of Special
Leave Petition (Civil) No. 5170 of 2021.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 5170 of 2021
30. This appeal is at the instance of an unsuccessful writ applicant of
a writ application being Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9456 of 2018 filed in
the High Court of Delhi and is directed against the judgment and order
dated 4-2-2020 by which a Division Bench of the High Court rejected
the writ application filed by the writ applicant (appellant herein)
thereby affirming the dismissal of the appellant herein from service as a
Sub-Inspector/GD, 45th Battalion, CRPF.
31. The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as
under.
32. The appellant herein was serving on the post of SI/GD with the
CRPF.
33. In August 2011, the appellant had applied for the post of SI in
the CRPF pursuant to a call for applications by the Union Public Service
Commission.
34. As part of the said application, the appellant was required to fill
the CRP 25 verification form. While filling up the form in August 2011,
in response to the question of whether any criminal proceeding is
pending against him in any court of law, he answered in the negative.
35. The appellant came to be inducted in the CRPF as an SI.
36. The appellant received an order dated 19-11-2015 from the
office of the Deputy Inspector General of Police ("DIGP"), Rampur, U.P.
whereby he was informed that an inquiry would commence on the
article of charge ("AoC") under Section 11 of the CRPF Act read with
Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955 that had been framed against him.
The translated version of the statement of the AoC reads as under:
"That No. 115213628 SI/GD Pushpendra Kumar Yadav, C/45
Battalion, CRPF, while working on the post of Sub-Inspector/GD,
being the member of force, has committed the misconduct and
misbehaviour, in which at the time of recruitment, personnel gave
false information in the past antecedents verification form (CRP Form
25) at Columns 12(a) and (b) that no case is pending against the
personnel in any court, however before the recruitment of personnel,
Case Crime No. 261 of 2002 under Sections 147, 149, 323, 325,
504, 506 and 307 IPC was registered against him at Police Station
Khajni, District Gorakhpur (U.P.). Personnel, during his recruitment,
has concealed the information regarding criminal case pending
against him and misguided the department by giving wrong
information, which is an offence punishable under Section 11(1) of
the CRPF Act, 1949 and Rule 27 of the Central Reserve Police Force
Rules, 1955."
37. By an order dated 23-9-2016, the office of the DIGP imposed a
penalty of removal from service on the applicant.
38. Departmental enquiry came to be conducted in which the
appellant submitted his defence statement. The inquiry officer
submitted his report to the Commandant, 45th Battalion, who in turn
submitted it to the DIG.
39. The appellant offered inter alia the following reasons in his
defence:
39.1. He was entirely unaware about the pendency of a case against
him in Rampur as he "was studying outside the village".
39.2. When he met some of the co-accused, they "assured" him that
a compromise had been reached in the criminal case.
39.3. He never received any summons nor appeared before any
court.
39.4. He could not understand the meaning of the contents of
Columns 12(a) and (b) of the verification form.
40. Upon considering the aforesaid reasons put forth by the
appellant and his response to the questions in Columns 12(a) and (b)
of the verification form, the DIGP, Rampur vide order dated 23-9-2016
imposed the penalty of removal of service on the appellant.
41. The appeal filed by the appellant in the office of the Inspector
General of Police ("IGP"), Lucknow also came to be dismissed.
42. The revision petition filed by the appellant in the office of SDG
also came to be rejected.
43. The appellant thereafter preferred the writ petition being Writ
Petition No. 9456 of 2018 in the High Court questioning the legality and
validity of the action of removal from service.
44. The High Court adjudicated the writ petition and vide the
impugned judgment and order dated 4-2-2020 rejected the same. The
High Court while rejecting the writ application held as under
:
"26. The Court has perused all the impugned orders, which have
taken note of the facts surrounding the petitioner's case, as noted in
the foregoing paragraphs, and arrived at the decision to remove the
petitioner from service. The petitioner's contention that the
respondents in accordance with the decision in Avtar Singh3
were
required to factor in the relevant facts as to his antecedents, is
untenable. In order for the petitioner to demand that the
respondents consider his antecedents before passing an order of
termination from service, as per Para 34(4)(c) of Avtar Singh³, the
petitioner's acquittal should have been before his appointment.
Admittedly, the petitioner's case is not one of acquittal before his
appointment.
27. In any event, the order of the DA has set out detailed reasons
for rejecting every contention raised by the petitioner in his
representation against the findings in the inquiry report. The orders
of the AA, RA as
well as the DG, CRPF also do not merely reiterate the findings of each
lower authority, but offer their reasons for affirming the penalty of
removal of service, while having regard to the CRPF Act and Rules. The
Court, therefore, is not convinced by the petitioner's argument alleging
"non-application of mind" on the part of the respondents.
28. As regards the petitioner's submission that the respondents
had not complied with the DoPT's instructions on the handling of
anonymous/pseudonymous complaints as put forth in several OMs
issued in this regard, it bears mentioning, firstly, that the OM dated
11-10-2002 upon which the petitioner relied, which stipulated that
prior concurrence of the CVC was required to taken to look into the
verifiable facts contained in such anonymous/pseudonymous
complaints, has since been withdrawn by an OM dated 26-11-2014.
29. Turning to OM dated 18-10-2013, Para 3(iii) thereof reads as
under:
'(iii) If a complaint contains verifiable allegations, the
administrative Ministry/Department may take cognizance of such
complaint with the approval of the competent authority to be
designated by the Ministry/Department as per their distribution of
work. In such cases, the complaint will be first sent to the
complainant for owning/disowning, as the case may be. If no
response is received from the complainant within 15 days of
sending the complaint, a reminder will be sent. After waiting for
15 days after sending the reminder, if still nothing is heard, the
said complaint may be filed as pseudonymous by the
Ministry/Department.'
30. It must be noticed, at this juncture, that it is not the
petitioner's case that the paragraph reproduced hereinabove was not
complied with by the respondents. In any event, the aforesaid Para 3
(iii) makes provision for the method of ascertaining the identity of
the complainant before such a complaint may be filed as
"pseudonymous". A bare perusal of the record of the case evinces
that such an attempt was made by the respondents by engaging in
correspondence with the SP, Gorakhpur, through which the
petitioner's involvement in criminal proceedings was incontrovertibly
established. Indeed, nowhere has the petitioner denied his
involvement in the case thereafter. Hence, the respondents cannot
be faulted for relying solely on an unsubstantiated pseudonymous
complaint in proceeding against the petitioner.
31. The learned counsel for the petitioner then referred to a Letter
dated 1-2-2012 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs announcing
'Policy Guidelines for considering cases of candidates for
appointment in the CAPFs - pendency of criminal cases against
candidates - the effect of:'. He referred in particular to Para 2(iii) of
the said document which lists out instances where the candidate
"will not be considered for recruitment" and to the first proviso
thereto which states 'Provided further that the candidate shall not be
debarred in the above cases, if only an FIR has been registered/the
case is under investigation and no charges have been framed either
or
FIR or on the complaint in any court of law.' The learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that in the instant case since at the time of his
filling up the form in August 2011, only an FIR registered against him
and charges were not yet framed, the above proviso would apply.
32. This Court is unable to accept the above submission. The said
policy guidelines do not excuse the candidate from giving correct
answers to the questions posed in the application/attestation form.
In fact, it presupposes that the candidate has been truthful about
the pending FIR. However, in the present case, it is not in dispute
that the petitioner did not give the correct answers to the critical
questions about pendency of the criminal case against him. The
proviso to Para 2(iii) above, therefore, does not help the petitioner.
33. For all the aforementioned reasons, the Court finds no merit in
the petition and dismisses it, as such."
45. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here
before this Court with the present appeal.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant
46. Mr M.M. Singh, learned counsel appearing for the writ applicant
vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a serious error in
passing the impugned order. He would submit that the criminal
prosecution did not involve any moral turpitude. He laid much stress on
the fact that in the year 2002 when the criminal prosecution was
instituted the appellant was just 19 years of age and was not even
residing in the village as he was pursuing his studies at some other
place. He pointed out that as it was a family dispute, the same came to
be resolved. The settlement was arrived at between the parties.
47. In the aforesaid context, the learned counsel invited the
attention of this Court to p. 163 of the paper book. The document at p.
163 of the paper book is in the form of a settlement recorded before the
local village panchayat in writing duly signed by the parties concerned.
The same reads thus:
"Settlement by the Panchayat
We, Ram Prit Yadav s/o Ishwari Yadav resident of Village Nakdah,
Police Station Khajani, District Gorakhpur
First party
And
We, Paramhansh Yadav s/o late Ram Bali Yadav r/o Village
Nakdah, Police Station Khajani, District Gorakhpur
Second party
We both parties are resident of same village and are Pattidar with
each other. On the issue of land of khalihan near our house and on
'paimaish' a quarrel had occurred between us on 28-6-2002 and due
to confusion and misunderstanding, me first party has submitted
written complaint at police station. But now we both sides after
sitting together is settling our dispute through panchayat on 7-7-
2002. Now onwards all disputes have
been mutually settled/over between us. I Ram Prit Yadav first party do
Station Khajani, regarding this panchayati settlement tomorrow and
will make written request that no further action is required to be taken
regarding the incident occurred on 28-6-2002 because now we both
sides do not want any further action in the matter in court. We both
sides have settled the issue mutually.
Second party
First party
sd/- Paramhansh
sd/- - Ram Prit
Paramhash Yadav
Ram Prit Yadav
Witnesses:
1. Ramawati
2. Subhash Chandra Gupta
3. Anil Kumar Gupta
4. Chandra Bhan
5. Shyam Sunder
6. Ram Sagar
Date : 7-7-2002"
48. The learned counsel further submitted that the form was filled
up by the appellant almost after a period of nine years from the date of
the registration of the FIR in the year 2002. As it was a family dispute
which ultimately came to be compromised, the appellant all throughout
remained under the impression that nothing further was required to be
done in regard to the criminal case. He further pointed out that the
charge was framed by the trial court in 2011 i.e. almost after nine years
from the date of registration of the FIR. The trial ultimately resulted in
acquittal in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties.
49. The learned counsel would submit that the appellant bona fide
believed that in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,
there was no criminal case thereafter pending against him and the
others.
50. The learned counsel submitted that even filling up of the
verification form, the previous record of the appellant was got verified
through the District Magistrate who in turn sent a report to the DIG,
CRPF through the letter dated 28-11-2011 wherein it was stated that
nothing adverse was found in the police records. He submitted that on
27-2-2015, one unknown person named Brijesh Yadav (who was later
found to be not traceable) made a complaint with the
respondent/department against the appellant regarding the pendency
of the case. That the complaint was received by the Department, and a
report was called for by the office of the DIG, CRPF from the office of
the SSP, Gorakhpur. In pursuance of this, the SSP, Gorakhpur got an
investigation carried out by the Circle Officer, Khajani, Gorakhpur and
the Circle Officer submitted his report to the SSP. In the report, it was
mentioned that no such person by name Brijesh Yadav was found and
Crime Case No. 261 of 2002 was at the stage of settlement but since
charge-sheet was filed, it was pending in the court. The report was sent
by the SSP, Gorakhpur to the DIG, CRPF. He further pointed
out that on 28-7-2015, the appellant was acquitted from all the
charges by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Gorakhpur in Crime
Case No. 261 of 2002 on merits vide the judgment and order dated 28-
7-2015.
51. The learned counsel further submitted that the appellant served
for about 5 years in the CRPF with utmost sincerity and loyalty. Most of
the time during his (appellant herein) service i.e. about 4 years, he
served in the region of Kashmir. His service record has been
commendable and time and again he was rewarded for his service. He
further pointed out that the appellant was also selected in the CISF as
an ASI in 2010-2011, but as he was already in service with the CRPF
he could not join the CISF. He made a fervent appeal that one chance
may be given to the appellant as the termination from service will come
in his way in all future employments public or private.
52. In such circumstances, referred to above, the learned counsel
prayed that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed
and the appellant may be ordered to be reinstated in service by setting
aside the impugned order passed by the High Court as well as by the
department.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent
53. On the other hand, this appeal has been vehemently opposed by
Ms Madhavi Divan, the learned ASG appearing for the respondent. She
submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said
to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned
order. She reiterated the very same submissions as canvassed by her
while opposing the connected appeal.
54. Ms Divan, the learned ASG submitted that there being no merit
in the present appeal, the same may be dismissed.
55. The following facts are not in dispute:
55.1. The FIR was registered against the appellant herein and others
dated 28-6-2002 at Khajani Police Station bearing Crime Case No. 261
of 2002 for the offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 323, 325,
307, 504 and 506, respectively, of the IPC;
55.2. The accused persons including the appellant herein were
arrested & later ordered to be released on bail by the Sessions Court,
Gorakhpur;
55.3. At the end of the investigation, charge-sheet was filed in the
Court of the Judicial Magistrate, Gorakhpur. Upon filing of the charge-
sheet, Criminal Case No. 3266 of 2009 came to be registered on the file
of the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, Gorakhpur;
55.4. The Judicial Magistrate Court No. 24, Gorakhpur vide order
dated 2-8-2011 committed the case to the Court of Session in exercise
of his powers under Section 207 CrPC;
55.5. The Sessions Court at Gorakhpur framed charge vide order
dated 23-12-2011 for the offences punishable under Sections 147, 323,
325, 307, 504 and 506, respectively, read with Section 149 IPC;
55.6. The trial court ultimately acquitted all the accused persons as
the prosecution witnesses turned hostile;
55.7. The material on record would indicate that at the time of filling
of verification form on 20-8-2011, the appellant was on bail. On 9-7-
2002 charge-sheet was filed and on 2-8-2011, a copy of the charge- -
sheet was also furnished to the appellant;
55.8. In the verification form, more particularly in Clause 12, the
following questions are to be found:
"(a) Have you ever been arrested?
Yes/No
(b) Have you ever been prosecuted?
Yes/No
(c) Have you ever been kept under detention
Yes/No
*
*
*
(i)
Is any case pending against you in any court of law
Yes/No
at the time of filling up this verification roll?"
56. Against all the aforesaid questions, the appellant put a tick on
"NO", as above.
Position of law
57. In Union of India V. M. Bhaskaran, this Court held that when an
appointment is procured by a workman on the basis of a bogus and
forged casual labourer service card, it would amount to
misrepresentation and fraud on the employer. Therefore, it would create
no equity in favour of the workman or any estoppel against the
employer and for such misconduct, termination would be justified
6)
"6.
Consequently, it has to be held that the respondents were
guilty of misrepresentation and fraud perpetrated on the appellant
employer while getting employed in railway service and had
snatched such employment which would not have been made
available to them if they were not armed with such bogus and forged
labourer service cards.
It was clearly a case of fraud on the
appellant employer. If once such fraud is detected, the appointment
orders themselves which were found to be tainted and vitiated by
fraud and acts of cheating on the part of employees, were liable to
be recalled and were at least voidable at the option of the employer
concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even
better qualifications than the appointee or appointees but who had
not applied for the post because they did not possess the
qualifications mentioned in the advertisement. It amounts to a fraud
on public to appoint persons with inferior qualifications in such
circumstances unless it is clearly stated that the qualifications are
relaxable. No court should be a party to the perpetuation of the
fraudulent practice. It is of course true as noted by the Tribunal that
the facts of the case in the aforesaid decision were different from the
facts of the present case. And it is also true that in that case pending
the service which was continued pursuant to the order of the
Tribunal
the candidate concerned acquired the requisite qualification and hence
his appointment was not disturbed by this Court. But that is neither
here nor there. As laid down in the aforesaid decision, if by committing
fraud any employment is obtained, such a fraudulent practice cannot be
permitted to be countenanced by a court of law."
58. M. Bhaskaran was a case of fraud as forgery was committed.
59. In Delhi Admn. V. Sushil Kumar2, this Court laid stress on the
fact that the verification of character and antecedents is one of the
important criteria to test whether the selected candidate is suitable to a
post under the State.
60. In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan V. Ram Ratan Yadav 10 , this
"12.
In the present case the respondent was to serve as a
Physical Education Teacher in Kendriya Vidyalaya. The character,
conduct and antecedents of a teacher will have some impact on the
minds of the students of impressionable age. The appellants having
considered all the aspects passed the order of dismissal of the
respondent from service. The Tribunal after due consideration rightly
recorded a finding of fact in upholding the order of dismissal passed
by the appellants."
61. In the aforesaid case, this Court held that the purpose of
requiring an employee to furnish information regarding
prosecution/conviction, etc. in the verification form was to assess his
character and antecedents for the purpose of employment and
continuation in service; that suppression of material information and
making a false statement in reply to queries relating to prosecution and
conviction had a clear bearing on the character, conduct and
antecedents of the employee; and that where it is found that the
employee had suppressed or given false information in regard to
matters which had a bearing on his fitness or suitability to the post, he
could be terminated from service during the period of probation without
holding any inquiry. This Court also made it clear that neither the
gravity of the criminal offence nor the ultimate acquittal therein was
relevant when considering whether a probationer who suppresses a
material fact (of his being involved in a criminal case, in the personal
information furnished to the employer), is fit to be continued as a
probationer.
62. In Kamal Nayan Mishra V. State of M.P. 11 , the ratio decidendi in
Ram Ratan Yadav10 was discussed and clarified as follows : (Kamal
"14. Therefore, the ratio decidendi of Ram Ratan Yadav10 is, where
an employee (probationer) is required to give his personal data in an
attestation form in connection with his appointment (either at the
time of
or thereafter), if it is found that the employee had suppressed or given
false information in regard to matters which had a bearing on his
fitness or suitability to the post, he could be terminated from service
during the period of probation without holding any inquiry. The decision
dealt with a probationer and not a holder of a civil post, and nowhere
laid down a proposition that a confirmed employee holding a civil post
under the State, could be terminated from service for furnishing false
information in an attestation form, without giving an opportunity to
meet the charges against him."
(emphasis supplied)
Thus, this Court in Kamal Nayan Mishra¹1 held that an employee
who is found to have suppressed material facts at the time of
appointment, must be given an opportunity to defend the charges
against him and cannot be terminated without due notice.
64. In R. Radhakrishnan V. DG of Police12 this Court considered the
case of a candidate for appointment as a Fireman who had furnished
wrong information about his involvement in a criminal case, though he
was acquitted. This Court held that the standards expected of a person
intended to serve in such a service are different from the one of the
persons who intended to serve in other services. It was also concluded
that the candidate knew and understood the implications of the
omission in his statement to disclose vital information. The candidate
by not disclosing his involvement in a criminal case, prevented the
authority from verifying his character as a suitable appointment. This
Court, therefore, declined to exercise its equitable jurisdiction in favour
of such a candidate who had suppressed such material facts.
65. Similarly, in Union of India V. Bipad Bhanjan Gayen13 this Court
dealt with the validity of the termination of the candidate, who had
The surest wayt to legal research!
been selected for training as a Constable in the Railway Protection
Force. This Court recognised that different standards are to apply to the
different services while determining the question of validity of the
termination when material facts are suppressed. It was held as under :
"10. It bears repetition that what has led to the termination of
service of the respondent is not his involvement in the two cases
which were then pending, and in which he had been discharged
subsequently, but the fact that he had withheld relevant information
while filling in the attestation form. We are further of the opinion
that an employment as a police officer presupposes a higher level of
integrity as such a person is expected to uphold the law, and on the
contrary, such a service born in deceit and subterfuge cannot be
tolerated."
(emphasis supplied)
66. In State of Haryana V. Dinesh Kumar14, this Court considered
the case of an employee (constable driver for State Police) who had
answered "No" to a query as to whether he was arrested. The employee
had argued that as a layman,
his understanding of arrest did not match with the legal definition of
arrest. The candidate said he had voluntarily appeared before the
Magistrate, without being taken into formal custody, was granted bail
& 232, paras 12 & 31)
"12. One of the common questions which, therefore, needs to be
answered in both these appeals is whether the manner in which they
had appeared before the Magistrate and had been released without
being taken into formal custody, could amount to "arrest" for the
purpose of the query in Column 13(A).
*
*
*
15
31. In our view, the reasoning given in Dinesh Kumar case
in
that context is a possible view and does not call for interference
under Article 136 of the Constitution. Conversely, the decision
rendered in the writ petitions filed by Lalit Kumar and Bhupinder has
to be reversed to be in line with the decision in Dinesh Kumar
case¹5 When the question as to what constitutes "arrest" has for
long engaged the attention of different High Courts as also this
Court, it may not be altogether unreasonable to expect a layman to
construe that he had never been arrested on his appearing before
the court and being granted bail immediately. The position would
have been different, had the person concerned not been released on
bail. We would, in the facts of these cases, give the benefit of a
mistaken impression, rather than that of deliberate and wilful
misrepresentation and concealment of facts, to the appellants in the
second of the two appeals as well, while affirming the view taken by
the High Court in Dinesh Kumar case "
(emphasis supplied)
67. Thus, it was held that even if what transpired may technically
amount to arrest, the benefit of a mistaken impression rather than the
consequences of a deliberate and wilful misrepresentation and
concealment of facts, should be extended to the employee.
68. This Court in Daya Shankar Yadav V. Union of India¹ was faced
with a similar issue wherein a CRPF officer upon suppression of material
facts was terminated from the service. This Court while referring to its
11, paras 14-16)
"14.
The purpose of seeking the said information is to ascertain
the character and antecedents of the candidate so as to assess his
suitability for the post. Therefore, the candidate will have to answer
the questions in these columns truthfully and fully and any
misrepresentation or suppression or false statement therein, by itself
would demonstrate a conduct or character unbefitting for a
uniformed security service.
15. When an employee or a prospective employee declares in a
verification form, answers to the queries relating to character and
antecedents, the verification thereof can therefore lead to any of the
following consequences:
(a) If the declarant has answered the questions in the
affirmative and furnished the details of any criminal case (wherein
he was convicted or acquitted by giving benefit of doubt for want
of evidence), the employer may refuse to offer him employment
(or if already employed on probation, discharge him from service),
if he is found to be unfit having regard to the nature and gravity
of the offence/crime in which he was involved.
(b) On the other hand, if the employer finds that the criminal
case disclosed by the declarant related to offences which were
technical, or of a nature that would not affect the declarant's
fitness for employment, or where the declarant had been
honourably acquitted and exonerated, the employer may ignore
the fact that the declarant had been prosecuted in a criminal case
and proceed to appoint him or continue him in employment.
(c) Where the declarant has answered the questions in the
negative and on verification it is found that the answers were
false, the employer may refuse to employ the declarant (or
discharge him, if already employed), even if the declarant had
been cleared of the charges or is acquitted. This is because when
there is suppression or non-disclosure of material information
bearing on his character, that itself becomes a reason for not
employing the declarant.
(d) Where the attestation form or verification form does not
contain proper or adequate queries requiring the declarant to
disclose his involvement in any criminal proceedings, or where the
candidate was unaware of initiation of criminal proceedings when
he gave the declarations in the verification roll/attestation form,
then the candidate cannot be found fault with, for not furnishing
the relevant information. But if the employer by other means (say
police verification or complaints, etc.) learns about the
involvement of the declarant, the employer can have recourse to
courses (a) or (b) above.
16. Thus an employee on probation can be discharged from
service or a prospective employee may be refused employment:
(i) on the ground of unsatisfactory antecedents and character,
disclosed from his conviction in a criminal case, or his
involvement in a criminal offence (even if he was acquitted on
technical grounds or by giving benefit of doubt) or other conduct
(like copying in examination) or rustication or suspension or
debarment from college, etc.; and
(ii) on the ground of suppression of material information or
making false statement in reply to queries relating to prosecution
or conviction for a criminal offence (even if he was ultimately
acquitted in the criminal case).
This ground is distinct from the ground of previous antecedents and character, as
it shows a current dubious conduct and absence of character at the time of
making the declaration, thereby making him unsuitable for the post."
(emphasis supplied)
69. This Court in the aforesaid case while deliberating on the very
same questions as were asked in the verification form from the
appellant in the present case, held that : (Daya Shankar Yadav case1
"24. We are satisfied that the appellant had knowingly made a
false statement that he was not prosecuted in any criminal case.
Therefore, the employer (CRPF) was justified in dispensing with his
services for not being truthful in giving material information
regarding his antecedents which were relevant for employment in a
uniformed service, and that itself justified his discharge from service.
Consequently, we dismiss this appeal as having no merit."
70. In Commr. of Police V. Sandeep Kumar17, the candidate after
clearing the test, disclosed his involvement in a criminal case which
was compromised and later on such compromise was acquitted. A show
-cause notice was issued to him asking him to show cause as to why
his candidature for the post should not be cancelled as he had
concealed the fact of his involvement in the criminal case and had
made a wrong statement in his application form. The authorities were
not satisfied with the explanation offered and went on to terminate his
employment. A challenge was made by him before the Administrative
Tribunal which declined to interfere. However, the High Court granted18
the relief by setting aside the proposal for cancellation of his
candidature.
71. This Court upheld the order of the High Court by granting the
12)
"12. It is true that in the application form the respondent did not
mention that he was involved in a criminal case under Sections
325/34 IPC. Probably he did not mention this out of fear that if he
did so he would automatically be disqualified. At any event, it was
not such a serious offence like murder, dacoity or rape, and hence a
more lenient view should be taken in the matter."
72. The Court in Sandeep Kumar case¹7 took into consideration the
fact that the incident had happened when the respondent was 20 years
of age. The Court held that young people are not expected to behave in
as mature a manner as the older people. The Court highlighted that the
approach should be to condone minor indiscretions made by young
people rather than to brand them as criminals for the rest of their lives.
73. In Jainendra Singh V. State of U.P. 19 , this Court, while referring
to its previous precedents set on the issue of suppression of material
facts being a ground for termination laid down certain principles to be
considered. This Court also called for the constitution of a larger Bench
to settle the issue. The yardsticks laid down by this Court are as
"29. As noted by us, all the above decisions were rendered by a
Division Bench of this Court consisting of two Judges and having
bestowed our serious consideration to the issue, we consider that
while dealing with such an issue, the Court will have to bear in mind
the various cardinal principles before granting any relief to the
aggrieved party, namely:
29.1. Fraudulently obtained orders of appointment could be
legitimately treated as voidable at the option of the employer or
could be recalled by the employer and in such cases merely because
the respondent employee has continued in service for a number of
years, on the basis of such fraudulently obtained employment,
cannot get any equity in his favour or any estoppel against the
employer.
29.2. Verification of the character and antecedents is one of the
important criteria to test whether the selected candidate is suitable
to the post under the State and on account of his antecedents the
appointing authority if finds it not desirable to appoint a person to a
disciplined force can it be said to be unwarranted.
29.3. When appointment was procured by a person on the basis of
forged documents, it would amount to misrepresentation and fraud
on the employer and, therefore, it would create no equity in his
favour or any estoppel against the employer while resorting to
termination without holding any inquiry.
29.4. A candidate having suppressed material information and/or
giving false information cannot claim right to continue in service and
the employer, having regard to the nature of employment as well as
other aspects, has the discretion to terminate his services.
29.5. The purpose of calling for information regarding involvement
in any criminal case or detention or conviction is for the purpose of
verification of the character/antecedents at the time of recruitment
and suppression of such material information will have clear bearing
on the character and antecedents of the candidate in relation to his
continuity in service.
29.6. The person who suppressed the material information and/or
gives false information cannot claim any right for appointment or
continuity in service.
29.7. The standard expected of a person intended to serve in
uniformed service is quite distinct from other services and, therefore,
any deliberate statement or omission regarding a vital information
can be seriously viewed and the ultimate decision of the appointing
authority cannot be faulted.
29.8. An employee on probation can be discharged from service or
may be refused employment on the ground of suppression of
material information or making false statement relating to his
involvement in the criminal case, conviction or detention, even if
ultimately he was acquitted of the said case, inasmuch as such a
situation would make a person undesirable or unsuitable for the
post.
29.9. An employee in the uniformed service presupposes a higher
level of integrity as such a person is expected to uphold the law and
on the contrary such a service born in deceit and subterfuge cannot
be tolerated.
29.10. The authorities entrusted with the responsibility of
appointing constables, are under duty to verify the antecedents of a
candidate to find out whether he is suitable for the post of a
constable and so long as the candidate has not been acquitted in the
criminal case, he cannot be held to be suitable for appointment to
the post of constable."
74. The Court while referring the issues to the larger Bench observed
in paras 30 and 31, respectively, as under : (Jainendra Singh case ,
19
"30. When we consider the above principles laid down in the
majority of the decisions, the question that looms large before us is
when considering such claim by the candidates who deliberately
suppressed information at the time of recruitment, can there be
different yardsticks applied in the matter of grant of relief.
31. Though there are very many decisions in support of the
various points culled out in the above paragraphs, inasmuch as we
have noted certain other decisions taking different view of coordinate
Benches, we feel it appropriate to refer the abovementioned issues
to a larger Bench of this Court for an authoritative pronouncement so
that there will be no conflict of views and which will enable the
courts to apply the law uniformly while dealing with such issues."
75. This Court before settling the issues in Avtar Singh V. Union of
India ³ , discussed the said principles extensively in Commr. of Police V.
Mehar Singh20. In this case, a candidate for the post of Constable in
Delhi Police had disclosed his involvement in a criminal case, wherein
he was acquitted on technical grounds. The candidate had his
candidature for the post rejected by the Standing Committee. The
candidate argued that as he had been acquitted, the Standing
Committee by rejecting his candidature had overreached the decision of
the competent authority.
76. This Court, while deciding on the issue and whether the
respondent was honourably acquitted, held as under : (Mehar Singh
"25. The expression "honourable acquittal" was considered by this
Court in S. Samuthiram ²1. In that case this Court was concerned
with a
situation where disciplinary proceedings were initiated against a police
officer. Criminal case was pending against him under Section 509 IPC
and under Section 4 of the Eve-Teasing Act. He was acquitted in that
case because of the non-examination of key witnesses. There was a
serious flaw in the conduct of the criminal case. Two material witnesses
turned hostile. Referring to the judgment of this Court in RBI V. Bhopal
Singh Panchal ²2 where in somewhat similar fact situation, this Court
upheld a bank's action of refusing to reinstate an employee in service
on the ground that in the criminal case he was acquitted by giving him
benefit of doubt and, therefore, it was not an honourable acquittal, this
Court held that the High Court was not justified in setting aside the
punishment imposed in the departmental proceedings. This Court
observed that the expressions "honourable acquittal", "acquitted of
blame" and "fully exonerated" are unknown to the Criminal Procedure
Code or the Penal Code. They are coined by judicial pronouncements. It
is difficult to define what is meant by the expression "honourably
acquitted". This Court expressed that when the accused is acquitted
after full consideration of the prosecution case and the prosecution
miserably fails to prove the charges levelled against the accused, it can
possibly be said that the accused was honourably acquitted.
26. In light of the above, we are of the opinion that since the
purpose of the departmental proceedings is to keep persons, who are
guilty of serious misconduct or dereliction of duty or who are guilty
of grave cases of moral turpitude, out of the department, if found
necessary, because they pollute the department, surely the above
principles will apply with more vigour at the point of entry of a
person in the police department i.e. at the time of recruitment. If it
is found by the Screening Committee that the person against whom
a serious case involving moral turpitude is registered is discharged
on technical grounds or is acquitted of the same charge but the
acquittal is not honourable, the Screening Committee would be
entitled to cancel his candidature. Stricter norms need to be applied
while appointing persons in a disciplinary force because public
interest is involved in it.
*
*
*
34. The respondents are trying to draw mileage from the fact that
in their application and/or attestation form they have disclosed their
involvement in a criminal case. We do not see how this fact improves
their case. Disclosure of these facts in the application/attestation
form is an essential requirement. An aspirant is expected to state
these facts honestly. Honesty and integrity are inbuilt requirements
of the police force. The respondents should not, therefore, expect to
score any brownie points because of this disclosure. Besides, this has
no relevance to the point in issue. It bears repetition to state that
while deciding whether a person against whom a criminal case was
registered and who was later on acquitted or discharged should be
appointed to a post in the police force, what is relevant is the nature
of the offence, the extent of his involvement, whether the acquittal
was a clean acquittal or an acquittal by giving benefit of doubt
because the witnesses turned hostile or because of some serious
flaw in the prosecution, and the propensity of such person to indulge in
similar activities in future. This decision, in our opinion, can only be
taken by the Screening Committee created for that purpose by Delhi
Police. If the Screening Committee's decision is not mala fide or
actuated by extraneous considerations, then, it cannot be questioned.
35. The police force is a disciplined force. It shoulders the great
responsibility of maintaining law and order and public order in the
society. People repose great faith and confidence in it. It must be
worthy of that confidence. A candidate wishing to join the police
force must be a person of utmost rectitude. He must have
impeccable character and integrity. A person having criminal
antecedents will not fit in this category. Even if he is acquitted or
discharged in the criminal case, that acquittal or discharge order will
have to be examined to see whether he has been completely
exonerated in the case because even a possibility of his taking to the
life of crimes poses a threat to the discipline of the police force. The
Standing Order, therefore, has entrusted the task of taking decisions
in these matters to the Screening Committee. The decision of the
Screening Committee must be taken as final unless it is mala fide.
In recent times, the image of the police force is tarnished. Instances
of police personnel behaving in a wayward manner by misusing
power are in public domain and are a matter of concern. The
reputation of the police force has taken a beating. In such a
situation, we would not like to dilute the importance and efficacy of a
mechanism like the Screening Committee created by Delhi Police to
ensure that persons who are likely to erode its credibility do not
enter the police force. At the same time, the Screening Committee
must be alive to the importance of trust reposed in it and must treat
all candidates with even hand."
(emphasis supplied)
Precedent of Avtar Singh
77. In Avtar Singh³, a three-Judge Bench of this Court looked into
the conflict of opinion in the various decisions highlighted in Jainendra
Singh19. The larger Bench considered plethora of decisions on the
question of suppression of information or submitting false information
in the verification form, also as to the question of having been
criminally prosecuted, arrested or as to the pendency of a criminal case.
After analysing all the previous decisions of this Court on the subject,
30)
"30. The employer is given "discretion" to terminate or otherwise
to condone the omission. Even otherwise, once employer has the
power to take a decision when at the time of filling verification form
declarant has already been convicted/acquitted, in such a case, it
becomes obvious that all the facts and attending circumstances,
including impact of suppression or false information are taken into
consideration while adjudging suitability of an incumbent for services
in question. In case the employer comes to the
conclusion that suppression is immaterial and even if facts would have
been disclosed it would not have adversely affected fitness of an
incumbent, for reasons to be recorded, it has power to condone the
lapse. However, while doing so employer has to act prudently on due
consideration of nature of post and duties to be rendered. For higher
officials/higher posts, standard has to be very high and even slightest
false information or suppression may by itself render a person
unsuitable for the post. However, same standard cannot be applied to
each and every post. In concluded criminal cases, it has to be seen
what has been suppressed is material fact and would have rendered an
incumbent unfit for appointment. An employer would be justified in not
appointing or if appointed, to terminate services of such incumbent on
due consideration of various aspects. Even if disclosure has been made
truthfully, the employer has the right to consider fitness and while
doing so effect of conviction and background facts of case, nature of
offence, etc. have to be considered. Even if acquittal has been made,
employer may consider nature of offence, whether acquittal is
honourable or giving benefit of doubt on technical reasons and decline
to appoint a person who is unfit or of dubious character. In case
employer comes to conclusion that conviction or ground of acquittal in
criminal case would not affect the fitness for employment incumbent
may be appointed or continued in service."
78. The larger Bench stated that an objective criterion must be
applied while terminating an employee who had suppressed material
facts. The Court held that mere suppression cannot be the sole reason
for termination and due consideration must be paid to the facts of the
case. The Court, while discussing the objective yardsticks that are to be
-36)
"34. No doubt about it that verification of character and
antecedents is one of the important criteria to assess suitability and
it is open to employer to adjudge antecedents of the incumbent, but
ultimate action should be based upon objective criteria on due
consideration of all relevant aspects.
35. Suppression of "material" information presupposes that what
is suppressed that "matters" not every technical or trivial matter.
The employer has to act on due consideration of rules/instructions if
any in exercise of powers in order to cancel candidature or for
terminating the services of employee. Though a person who has
suppressed the material information cannot claim unfettered right
for appointment or continuity in service but he has a right not to be
dealt with arbitrarily and exercise of power has to be in reasonable
manner with objectivity having due regard to facts of cases.
36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the nature
of post, higher post would involve more rigorous criteria for all
services, not only to uniformed service. For lower posts which are not
sensitive, nature
of duties, impact of suppression on suitability has to be considered by
authorities concerned considering post/nature of duties/services and
power has to be exercised on due consideration of various aspects."
79. The Court proceeded to hold further that a chance of reformation
should be afforded to the young offenders in suitable cases while
exercising the power for cancelling candidature. The Court thereafter
summarised the discussion on the issue by way of laying down certain
38)
"38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and
reconcile them as far as possible. In view of the aforesaid discussion,
we summarise our conclusion thus:
38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as to
conviction, acquittal or arrest, or pendency of a criminal case,
whether before or after entering into service must be true and there
should be no suppression or false mention of required information.
38.2. While passing order of termination of services or
cancellation of candidature for giving false information, the employer
may take notice of special circumstances of the case, if any, while
giving such information.
38.3. The employer shall take into consideration the government
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of
taking the decision.
38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of
involvement in a criminal case where conviction or acquittal had
already been recorded before filling of the application/verification
form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer, any of the
following recourse appropriate to the case may be adopted:
38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been
recorded, such as shouting slogans at young age or for a petty
offence which if disclosed would not have rendered an incumbent
unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion, ignore
such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.
38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not
trivial in nature, employer may cancel candidature or terminate
services of the employee.
38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving
moral turpitude or offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical
ground and it is not a case of clean acquittal, or benefit of reasonable
doubt has been given, the employer may consider all relevant facts
available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
the continuance of the employee.
38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration
truthfully of a concluded criminal case, the employer still has the
right to consider antecedents, and cannot be compelled to appoint
the candidate.
38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character
verification form regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial
nature, employer, in facts and circumstances of the case, in its
discretion may appoint the candidate subject to decision of such
case.
38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to
multiple pending cases such false information by itself will assume
significance and an employer may pass appropriate order cancelling
candidature or terminating services as appointment of a person
against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be
proper.
38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate
at the time of filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and
the appointing authority would take decision after considering the
seriousness of the crime.
38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding
departmental enquiry would be necessary before passing order of
termination/removal or dismissal on the ground of suppression or
submitting false information in verification form.
38.10. For determining suppression or false information
attestation/verification form has to be specific, not vague. Only such
information which was required to be specifically mentioned has to
be disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant comes to
knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an
objective manner while addressing the question of fitness. However,
in such cases action cannot be taken on basis of suppression or
submitting false information as to a fact which was not even asked
for.
38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or
suggestio falsi, knowledge of the fact must be attributable to him."
(emphasis in original and supplied)
Position of law post Avtar Singh³
80. In State (UT of Chandigarh) V. Pradeep Kumar23 the issue of the
respondent therein being honourably acquitted and entitled to being
reinstated was raised. This Court, while relying upon Mehar Singh and
20
holding that the nature of the offences must be looked into, held as
"13. It is thus well settled that acquittal in a criminal case does
not automatically entitle him for appointment to the post. Still it is
open to the employer to consider the antecedents and examine
whether he is suitable for appointment to the post. From the
observations of this Court
in Mehar Singh20 and Parvez Khan24 cases, it is clear that a candidate
to be recruited to the police service must be of impeccable character
and integrity. A person having criminal antecedents will not fit in this
category. Even if he is acquitted or discharged, it cannot be presumed
that he was honourably acquitted/completely exonerated. The decision
of the Screening Committee must be taken as final unless it is shown to
be mala fide. The Screening Committee also must be alive to the
importance of the trust reposed in it and must examine the candidate
with utmost character.
*
*
*
15. From the above details, we find that the Screening Committee
examined each and every case of the respondents and reasonings for
their acquittal and took the decision. While deciding whether a
person involved in a criminal case has been acquitted or discharged
should be appointed to a post in a police force, nature of offence in
which he is involved, whether it was an honourable acquittal or only
an extension of benefit of doubt because of witnesses turned hostile
and flaws in the prosecution are all the aspects to be considered by
the Screening Committee for taking the decision whether the
candidate is suitable for the post."
(emphasis supplied)
81. In State of M.P. V. Bunty25, the candidate had not disclosed the
fact that he had criminal proceedings pending against him at the time
of verification. The criminal proceedings were based on the candidate
impersonating a police officer and this Court treated it to be a case
which involved moral turpitude. The candidate was granted benefit of
doubt. The candidate had been acquitted on the technical ground of a
witness being held hostile. This Court held that the perception formed
by the Screening Committee, that he was unfit to be inducted in the
disciplined police force, was appropriate. Further it was held that, the
decision of the Scrutiny Committee could not be said to be such which
warranted judicial interference unless there is a mala fide intent
involved.
82. In State of Rajasthan V. Love Kush Meena26, the respondent was
charged under Sections 302, 323, 341/34, respectively, of the IPC and
was acquitted as the prosecution failed to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt. The witnesses had turned hostile. The candidate had
disclosed the said fact at the time of applying; however, his
appointment was cancelled relying on Avtar Singh This Court held as
"24. Examining the controversy in the present case in the
conspectus of the aforesaid legal position, what is important to note
is the fact that the view of this Court has depended on the nature of
offence charged and the result of the same. The mere fact of an
acquittal would not suffice but rather
it would depend on whether it is a clean acquittal based on total
absence of evidence or in the criminal jurisprudence requiring the case
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, that parameter having not been
met, benefit of doubt has been granted to the accused.
*
*
*
26. The judgment in Avtar Singh case3 on the relevant parameter
extracted aforesaid clearly stipulates that where in respect of a
heinous or serious nature of crime the acquittal is based on a benefit
of reasonable doubt, that cannot make the candidate eligible."
(emphasis supplied)
83. In Union of India V. Methu Meda the respondent had applied for
the post of Constable in the CISF and was selected. The respondent
had disclosed about the case in which he was acquitted. However, his
selection was subsequently cancelled. The respondent challenged the
same vide a writ petition, which the High Court allowed This Court,
however, set aside the High Court's orders 28 and discussed the
consequence of an acquittal on technical grounds. It was also reiterated
that a person joining the police force must be of impeccable character
and must not have any criminal antecedents. This Court held as under :
"17. In view of the above, in the facts of the present case, as per
paras 38.3, 38.4.3 and 38.5 of Avtar Singh case³ it is clear that the
employer is having right to consider the suitability of the candidate
as per government orders/instructions/rules at the time of taking the
decision for induction of the candidate in employment. Acquittal on
technical ground in respect of the offences of heinous/serious nature,
which is not a clean acquittal, the employer may have a right to
consider all relevant facts available as to the antecedents, and may
take appropriate decision as to the continuance of the employee.
Even in case, truthful declaration regarding concluded trial has been
made by the employee, still the employer has the right to consider
antecedents and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate.
*
*
*
20. In view of the aforesaid, it is clear the respondent who wishes
to join the police force must be a person of utmost rectitude and
have impeccable character and integrity. A person having criminal
antecedents would not be fit in this category. The employer is having
right to consider the nature of acquittal or decide until he is
completely exonerated because even a possibility of his taking to the
life of crimes poses a threat to the discipline of the police force. The
Standing Order, therefore, has entrusted the task of taking decisions
in these matters to the Screening Committee and the decision of the
Committee would be final unless mala fide.
21. As discussed hereinabove, the law is well settled. If a person
is acquitted giving him the benefit of doubt, from the charge of an
offence involving moral turpitude or because the witnesses turned
hostile, it would not automatically entitle him for the employment,
that too in disciplined force. The employer is having a right to
consider his candidature in terms of the circulars issued by the
Screening Committee. The mere disclosure of the offences alleged
and the result of the trial is not sufficient. In the said situation, the
employer cannot be compelled to give appointment to the
candidate."
(emphasis supplied)
84. In Union of India V. Dilip Kumar Mallick a CRPF officer had
suppressed the fact that the proceedings under the IPC were pending
against him. The Court, while referring to Avtar Singh3 held that the
suppression can be a ground for an employer to cancel the candidature
or to terminate the services. The respondent served in the organisation
since 2003 and continued to remain as an undertrial accused without
the knowledge of the organisation. The respondent received an
honourable acquittal from the trial court. This Court held as under :
"18. Thus, it remains beyond the pale of doubt that the cases of
non-disclosure of material information and of submitting false
information have been treated as being of equal gravity by this Court
and it is laid down in no uncertain terms that non-disclosure by itself
may be a ground for an employer to cancel the candidature or to
terminate services. Even in the summation abovequoted, this Court
has emphasised that information given to the employer by a
candidate as to criminal case including the factors of arrest or
pendency of the case, whether before or after entering into service,
must be true and there should be no suppression or false mention of
the required information.
19. In case of suppression, when the facts later come to the
knowledge of employer, different courses of action may be adopted
by the employer depending on the nature of fault as also the nature
of default; and this Court has indicated that if the case is of trivial
nature, like that of shouting slogans at a young age, etc. the
employer may ignore such suppression of fact or false information
depending on the factors as to whether the information, if disclosed,
would have rendered incumbent unfit for the post in question.
20. However, the aforesaid observations do not lead to the
corollary that in a case of the present nature where a criminal case
was indeed pending against the respondent and the facts were
altogether omitted from being mentioned, the employer would be
obliged to ignore such defaults and shortcomings.
*
*
*
22. In the given set of facts and circumstances, where
suppression of relevant information is not a matter of dispute, there
cannot be any legal basis for the Court to interfere in the manner
that the employer
be directed to impose "any lesser punishment", as directed30 by the
Division Bench of the High Court. The submissions seeking to evoke
sympathy and calling for leniency cannot lead to any relief in favour of
the respondent."
(emphasis supplied)
85. In Pawan Kumar V. Union of a case was registered
against the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 148,
149, 323, 356 and 506, respectively, of the IPC. The appellant was
honourably acquitted. However, the fact of the said criminal prosecution
was not disclosed in the attestation form filled by the petitioner. On
such ground, the appellant was discharged from service. The High
Court upheld³² the discharge. While allowing the appeal, this Court held
"13. What emerges from the exposition as laid down by this Court
is that by mere suppression of material/false information regardless
of the fact whether there is a conviction or acquittal has been
recorded, the employee/recruit is not to be discharged/terminated
axiomatically from service just by a stroke of pen. At the same time,
the effect of suppression of material/false information involving in a
criminal case, if any, is left for the employer to consider all the
relevant facts and circumstances available as to antecedents and
keeping in view the objective criteria and the relevant service rules
into consideration, while taking appropriate decision regarding
continuance/suitability of the employee into service. What has been
noticed by this Court is that mere suppression of material/false
information in a given case does not mean that the employer can
arbitrarily discharge/terminate the employee from service.
*
*
*
19. The criminal case indeed was of trivial nature and the nature
of post and nature of duties to be discharged by the recruit has
never been looked into by the competent authority while examining
the overall suitability of the incumbent keeping in view Rule 52 of
the Rules 1987 to become a member of the force. Taking into
consideration the exposition expressed by this Court in Avtar Singh³,
in our considered view the order of discharge passed by the
competent authority dated 24-4-2015 is not sustainable and in
sequel thereto the judgment passed by the Division Bench of High
Court of Delhi does not hold good and deserves to be set aside."
(emphasis supplied)
86. In Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd. V. Anil
Kanwariya this Court gave altogether a different dimension to the
issue in question. In the said case, the respondent had applied for the
post of Technical Helper on the establishment of the appellant Nigam.
The respondent was appointed as a Technical Helper on probation for a
period of two years w.e.f. 6-5-2015. The
appointment of the respondent was subjected to the production of a
character certificate/verification report to be issued by the
Superintendent of Police of the native district of the respondent. The
Superintendent, Sawai Madhopur vide his report dated 5-6-2015
informed the appellant that a criminal case bearing No. 13 of 2011 for
the offences punishable under Sections 143, 341 and 323, respectively,
of the IPC was registered against the respondent and the respondent
came to be convicted vide the judgment and order dated 5-8-2013
passed by the trial court. The report of Superintendent of Police further
stated that the respondent was given the benefit under the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958. In other words, although the respondent stood
convicted for the alleged offence yet the trial court thought fit to
release him on probation. This fact was supressed by the respondent at
the time of his appointment. In such circumstances, action was taken
and ultimately the respondent's services came to be terminated. The
respondent challenged the order of termination in the High Court.
87. The learned Single Judge3 of the High Court set aside the order
of termination and directed the appellant to reinstate the respondent.
The appellant Nigam preferred an intra-court appeal before the Division
Bench. The appeal came to be dismissed ³ The appellant Nigam
ultimately came to this Court and challenged the orders passed by the
High Court. This Court while allowing the appeal filed by the Nigam
"14. The issue/question may be considered from another angle,
from the employer's point of view. The question is not about whether
an employee was involved in a dispute of trivial nature and whether
he has been subsequently acquitted or not. The question is about
the credibility and/or trustworthiness of such an employee who at
the initial stage of the employment i.e. while submitting the
declaration/verification and/or applying for a post made false
declaration and/or not disclosing and/or suppressing material fact of
having involved in a criminal case. If the correct facts would have
been disclosed, the employer might not have appointed him. Then
the question is of TRUST. Therefore, in such a situation, where the
employer feels that an employee who at the initial stage itself has
made a false statement and/or not disclosed the material facts
and/or suppressed the material facts and therefore he cannot be
continued in service because such an employee cannot be relied
upon even in future, the employer cannot be forced to continue such
an employee. The choice/option whether to continue or not to
continue such an employee always must be given to the employer.
At the cost of repetition, it is observed and as observed hereinabove
in a catena of decisions such an employee cannot claim the
appointment and/or continue to be in service as a matter of right."
(emphasis supplied)
88. Thus, this Court in Anil Kanwariya case33 took the view that
irrespective of the fact whether the dispute is of a trivial nature or not,
it is the credibility/trustworthiness of a particular employee which
matters the most when it comes to public employment. This Court took
the view that if a particular employee supresses something important
or makes any false declaration with a view to secure public employment
then such employee could be said to have exhibited a tendency which
is likely to shake the confidence of the employer. In such
circumstances, it would be within the discretion of the employer
whether to continue or not to continue such an employee who has
exhibited a tendency which reflects on his overall character or
credibility.
89. We now proceed to look into the decision of this Court in Mohd.
Imran V. State of Maharashtra 36 upon which strong reliance has been
placed on behalf of the appellant herein. In the said case, the appellant
Mohammed Imran was denied appointment in judicial service on the
ground of moral turpitude as he had to face criminal prosecution for the
offences punishable under Sections 363 and 366, respectively, read
with Section 34 IPC. The appellant had been acquitted of the charge
under Sections 363 and 366 read with Section 34 IPC much before he
cleared the examination for appointment in the judicial service in the
year 2009. Thus, it was a case wherein the criminal prosecution came
in the way of the appellant. Although he stood acquitted by the trial
court yet he was denied appointment on the ground of "moral
turpitude".
90. The appellant in Mohd. Imran case36 lost before the High Court37
of Bombay. This Court while allowing his appeal observed as under :
"5. Employment opportunities are a scarce commodity in our
country. Every advertisement invites a large number of aspirants for
limited number of vacancies. But that may not suffice to invoke
sympathy for grant of relief where the credentials of the candidate
may raise serious questions regarding suitability, irrespective of
eligibility. Undoubtedly, judicial service is very different from other
services and the yardstick of suitability that may apply to other
services, may not be the same for a judicial service. But there cannot
be any mechanical or rhetorical incantation of moral turpitude, to
deny appointment in judicial service simpliciter. Much will depend on
the facts of a case. Every individual deserves an opportunity to
improve, learn from the past and move ahead in life by self-
improvement. To make past conduct, irrespective of all
considerations, an albatross around the neck of the candidate, may
not always constitute justice. Much will, however depend on the fact
situation of a case.
6. That the expression "moral turpitude" is not capable of precise
definition was considered in Pawan Kumar V. State of Haryana
`12. "Moral turpitude" is an expression which is used in legal as
also societal parlance to describe conduct which is inherently
base, vile, depraved or having any connection showing depravity.'
7. The appellant by dint of hard academic labour was successful at
the competitive examination held on 16-8-2009 and after viva voce
was selected and recommended for appointment by the Maharashtra
Public Service Commission on 14-10-2009. In his attestation form,
he had duly disclosed his prosecution and acquittal. Mere disclosure
in an appropriate case may not be sufficient to hold for suitability in
employment. Nonetheless the nature of allegations and the conduct
in the facts of a case would certainly be a relevant factor. While
others so recommended came to be appointed, the selection of the
appellant was annulled on 4-6-2010 in view of the character
verification report of the police.
8. It is an undisputed fact that one Shri Sudhir Gulabrao Barde,
who had been acquitted on 24-11-2009 in Case No. 3022 of 2007
under Sections 294, 504 and 34 IPC, has been appointed. We are
not convinced, that in the facts and circumstances of the present
case, the appellant could be discriminated and denied appointment
arbitrarily when both the appointments were in judicial service, by
the same selection procedure, of persons who faced criminal
prosecutions and were acquitted. The distinction sought to be drawn
by the respondents, that the former was not involved in a case of
moral turpitude does not leave us convinced. In Joginder Singh39
it
`25. Further, apart from a small dent in the name of this
criminal case in which he has been honourably acquitted, there is
no other material on record to indicate that the antecedents or the
conduct of the appellant was not up to the mark to appoint him to
the post.'
9. In the present proceedings, on 23-3-201840 this Court had
called for a confidential report of the character verification as also the
antecedents of the appellant as on this date. The report received
reveals that except for the criminal case under reference in which he
has been acquitted, the appellant has a clean record and there is no
adverse material against him to deny him the fruits of his academic
labour in a competitive selection for the post of a judicial officer. In
our opinion, no reasonable person on the basis of the materials
placed before us can come to the conclusion that the antecedents
and character of the appellant are such that he is unfit to be
appointed as a judicial officer. An alleged single misadventure or
misdemeanour of the present nature, if it can be considered to be so,
cannot be sufficient to deny appointment to the appellant when he
has on all other aspects and parameters been found to be fit for
appointment. The law is well settled in this regard in Avtar Singh V.
Union of If empanelment creates no right to appointment,
equally there can be no arbitrary denial of appointment after
empanelment.
10. In the entirety of the facts and circumstances of the case, we
are of the considered opinion that the consideration of the
candidature of the appellant and its rejection are afflicted by a
myopic vision, blurred by the spectacle of what has been described
as moral turpitude, reflecting inadequate appreciation and
application of facts also, as justice may demand.
11. We, therefore, consider the present a fit case to set aside the
order dated 4-6-2010 and the impugned order37 dismissing the writ
petition, and direct the respondents to reconsider the candidature of
the appellant. Let such fresh consideration be done and an
appropriate decision be taken in the light of the present discussion,
preferably within a maximum period of eight weeks from the date of
receipt and production of the copy of the present order. In order to
avoid any future litigation on seniority or otherwise, we make it clear
that in the event of appointment, the appellant shall not be entitled
to any other reliefs."
91. Thus, this Court in Mohd. Imran case 36 took the view that
although employment opportunity is a scarce commodity in the present
times being circumscribed within limited vacancies yet by itself may
not suffice to invoke sympathy for grant of relief where the credentials
of a candidate may raise any question regarding his suitability,
irrespective of eligibility. However, at the same time, this Court
observed that there should not be any mechanical or rhetorical
incantation of moral turpitude to deny appointment in a government
service simpliciter which would depend on the facts of each case. The
judicial philosophy flowing through the mind of the Judges is that every
individual deserves an opportunity to improve, learn from the past and
move ahead in life for self-improvement. To make past conduct,
irrespective of all considerations, may not always constitute justice. It
would all depend on the fact situation of the given case.
92. The only reason to refer to and look into the various decisions
rendered by this Court as above over a period of time is that the
principles of law laid therein governing the subject are bit inconsistent.
Even after the larger Bench decision in Avtar Singh different courts
have enunciated different principles.
93. In such circumstances, we undertook some exercise to shortlist
the broad principles of law which should be made applicable to the
litigations of the present nature. The principles are as follows:
93.1. Each case should be scrutinised thoroughly by the public
employer concerned, through its designated officials - more so, in the
case of recruitment for the Police Force, who are under a duty to
maintain order, and tackle lawlessness, since their ability to inspire
public confidence is a bulwark to society's security. (See Raj Kumar4
93.2. Even in a case where the employee has made declaration
truthfully and correctly of a concluded criminal case, the employer still
has the right to consider the antecedents, and cannot be compelled to
appoint the candidate. The acquittal in a criminal case would not
automatically entitle a candidate for appointment to the post. It would
be still open to the employer to consider the antecedents and examine
whether the candidate concerned is suitable and fit for appointment to
the post.
93.3. The suppression of material information and making a false
statement in the verification form relating to arrest, prosecution,
conviction, etc. has a clear bearing on the character, conduct and
antecedents of the employee. If it is found that the employee had
suppressed or given false information in regard to the matters having a
bearing on his fitness or suitability to the post, he can be terminated
from service.
93.4. The generalisations about the youth, career prospects and age
of the candidates leading to condonation of the offenders' conduct,
should not enter the judicial verdict and should be avoided.
93.5. The Court should inquire whether the authority concerned
whose action is being challenged acted mala fide.
93.6. Is there any element of bias in the decision of the authority?
93.7. Whether the procedure of inquiry adopted by the authority
concerned was fair and reasonable?
Scope of appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution
94. Article 136 of the Constitution empowers the Supreme Court to
grant special leave in its discretion against any judgment, decree,
determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or
made by any court or tribunal except by any court or tribunal
constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces. It reads
as under:
"136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court. (1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may,
in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment,
decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter
passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment,
determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or
tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed
Forces."
95. The jurisdiction conferred by Article 136 is divisible into two
stages : the first stage is up to the disposal of prayer for the special
leave to file an appeal and the second stage commences, if and when,
the leave to appeal is granted and the special leave petition is
converted into an appeal. The legal position as summarised by this
Court in Kunhayammed V. State of Kerala41; affirmed in Khoday
42
Distilleries Ltd. V. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Ltd.
regarding the scope of two stages reads as under : (Kunhayammed
"14.
(1) While hearing the petition for special leave to appeal,
the Court is called upon to see whether the petitioner should be
granted such leave or not. While hearing such petition, the Court is
not exercising its appellate jurisdiction; it is merely exercising its
discretionary jurisdiction to grant or not to grant leave to appeal. The
petitioner is still outside the gate of entry though aspiring to enter
the appellate arena of the Supreme Court. Whether he enters or not
would depend on the fate of his petition for special leave;
(2) If the petition seeking grant of leave to appeal is dismissed, it
is an expression of opinion by the Court that a case for invoking
appellate jurisdiction of the Court was not made out.
(3) If leave to appeal is granted, the appellate jurisdiction of the
Court stands invoked; the gate for entry in the appellate arena is
opened. The petitioner is in and the respondent may also be called
upon to face him, though in an appropriate case, in spite of having
granted leave to appeal, the Court may dismiss the appeal without
noticing the respondent.
(4) In spite of a petition for special leave to appeal having been
filed, the judgment, decree or order against which leave to appeal
has been sought for, continues to be final, effective and binding as
between the parties. Once leave to appeal has been granted, the
finality of the judgment, decree or order appealed against is put in
jeopardy though it continues to be binding and effective between the
parties unless it is a nullity or unless the Court may pass a specific
order staying or suspending the operation or execution of the
judgment, decree or order under challenge."
96. In Pritam Singh V. State43 the Constitution Bench of this Court
has explained the scope and powers of this Court under Article 136 of
"11. On a careful examination of Article 136 along with the
preceding article, it seems clear that the wide discretionary power
The surest way t to legal research!"
with which this Court is invested under it is to be exercised sparingly
and in exceptional cases only, and as far as possible a more or less
uniform standard should be adopted in granting special leave in the
wide range of matters which can come up before it under this article.
By virtue of this article, we can grant special leave in civil cases, in
criminal cases, in income tax cases, in cases which come up before
different kinds of tribunals and in a variety of other cases. The only
uniform standard which in our opinion can be laid down in the
circumstances is that Court should grant special leave to appeal only
in those cases where special circumstances are shown to exist. The
Privy Council44 have tried to lay down from time to time certain
principles for granting special leave in criminal cases, which were
reviewed
by the Federal Court in Kapildeo V. R. 45 It is sufficient for our purpose
to say that though we are not bound to follow them too rigidly since the
reasons, constitutional and administrative, which sometimes weighed
with the Privy Council, need not weigh with us, yet some of those
principles are useful as furnishing in many cases a sound basis for
invoking the discretion of this Court in granting special leave. Generally
speaking, this Court will not grant special leave, unless it is shown that
exceptional and special circumstances exist, that substantial and grave
injustice has been done and that the case in question presents features
of sufficient gravity to warrant a review of the decision appealed
against.
12. Since the present case does not in our opinion fulfil any of
these conditions, we cannot interfere with the decision of the High
Court, and the appeal must be dismissed."
(emphasis supplied)
97. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Hem Raj V. State of
Ajmer46, held as under : (AIR p. 462, para 2)
"2. Unless it is shown that exceptional and special circumstances
exist that substantial and grave injustice has been done and the
case in question presents features of sufficient gravity to warrant a
review of the decision appealed against, this Court does not exercise
its overriding powers under Article 136(1) of the Constitution and
the circumstance that because the appeal has been admitted by
special leave does not entitle the appellant to open out the whole
case and contest all the findings of fact and raise every point which
could be raised in the High Court. Even at the final hearing only
those points can be urged which are fit to be urged at the
preliminary stage when the leave to appeal is asked for. The
question for consideration is whether this test is satisfied in either of
these two appeals. After hearing the learned counsel in both the
appeals we are satisfied that none of them raise any questions which
fall within the rule enunciated above."
(emphasis supplied)
98. The Constitution Bench of this Court in P.S.R. Sadhanantham V.
Arunachalam47, , has explained Article 136 of the Constitution as under :
"7.
In express terms, Article 136 does not confer a right of
appeal on a party as such but it confers a wide discretionary power
on the Supreme Court to interfere in suitable cases. The
discretionary dimension is considerable but that relates to the power
of the court. The question is whether it spells by implication, a fair
-procedure as contemplated by Article 21. In our view, it does.
Article 136 is a special jurisdiction. It is residuary power; it is
extraordinary in its amplitude, its limit, when it chases injustice, is
the sky itself. This Court functionally fulfils itself by reaching out to
injustice wherever it is and this power is largely derived in
the common run of cases from Article 136. Is it merely a power in the
court to be exercised in any manner it fancies? Is there no procedural
limitation in the manner of exercise and the occasion for exercise? Is
there no duty to act fairly while hearing a case under Article 136, either
in the matter of grant of leave or, after such grant, in the final disposal
of the appeal? We have hardly any doubt that there is a procedure
necessarily implicit in the power vested in the summit court. It must be
remembered that Article 136 confers jurisdiction on the highest court.
The Founding Fathers unarguably intended in the very terms of Article
136 that it shall be exercised by the highest Judges of the land with
scrupulous adherence to judicial principles well established by
precedents in our jurisprudence. Judicial discretion is canalised
authority, not arbitrary eccentricity. Cardozo, with elegant accuracy,
has observed
'The Judge, even when he is free, is still not wholly free. He is not
to innovate at pleasure. He is not a knight-errant roaming at will in
pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness. He is to draw his
inspiration from consecrated principles. It is not to yield to
spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated benevolence. He is
to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodised by
analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to "the primordial
necessity of order in the social life". Wide enough in all conscience is
the field of discretion that remains."
8. It is manifest that Article 136 is of composite structure, is
power-cum-procedure - power in that it vests jurisdiction in the
Supreme Court, and procedure in that it spells a mode of hearing. It
obligates the exercise of judicial discretion and the mode of hearing
so characteristic of the court process. In short, there is an in-built
prescription of power and procedure in terms of Article 136 which
meets the demand of Article 21.
9. We may eye the issue slightly differently. If Article 21 is
telescoped into Article 136, the conclusion follows that fair procedure
is imprinted on the special leave that the court may grant or refuse.
When a motion is made for leave to appeal against an acquittal, this
Court appreciates the gravity of the peril to personal liberty involved
in that proceeding. It is fair to assume that while considering the
petition under Article 136 the court will pay attention to the question
of liberty, the person who seeks such leave from the court, his
motive and his locus standi and the weighty factors which persuade
the court to grant special leave. When this conspectus of processual
circumstances and criteria play upon the jurisdiction of the court
under Article 136, it is reasonable to conclude that the desideratum
of fair procedure implied in Article 21 is adequately answered.
*
*
11. The wider the discretionary power the more sparing its
exercise. Times out of number this Court has stressed that though
parties promiscuously "provoke" this jurisdiction, the court
parsimoniously
invokes the power. Moreover, the court may not, save in special
situations, grant leave to one who is not eo nomine a party on the
record. Thus, procedural limitations exist and are governed by well-
worn rules of guidance."
(emphasis supplied)
99. Thus, the principles of law discernible from the aforesaid are that
unless, it is shown that exceptional and special circumstances exist;
that substantial and grave injustice has been done and the case and
question present features of sufficient gravity to warrant a review of the
decision appealed against, this Court would not exercise its overriding
powers under Article 136(1) of the Constitution. The wide discretionary
power with which this Court is invested under Article 136 is to be
exercised sparingly and in exceptional cases only.
100. Insofar as the appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C)
No. 20860 of 2019 filed by Satish Chandra Yadav is concerned, the
same should fail. We are not at all convinced with the case put forward
by Satish Chandra Yadav for informing the respondent herein that there
was no criminal case pending against him on the date he filled up the
verification form. The explanation offered by Satish Chandra Yadav is
nothing but his own understanding of what is prosecution and
pendency of a criminal case. If he knows that trial is deemed to have
commenced with the framing of charge, then we are sure he knows and
understands what is criminal prosecution.
101. Indisputably, Satish Chandra Yadav was still under probation at
the time his services had been terminated. It is also apparent from the
record that Satish Chandra Yadav had been given appointment on
probation subject to the verification of facts given in the verification
form. To our mind, therefore, if an enquiry revealed that the facts given
were wrong, the respondent herein was at liberty to dispense with the
services of the appellant Satish Chandra Yadav as the question of any
stigma and penal consequences at this stage would not arise. It bears
repetition that what has led to the termination of the services of the
appellant Satish Chandra Yadav is not his involvement in the criminal
case which was then pending, and in which he had been acquitted
subsequently but the fact that he had withheld relevant information
while filling in the verification form. He could be said to have exhibited
or displayed such a tendency which shook the confidence of the
respondent.
102. Administrative law has traditionally approached the review of
decisions classified as discretionary separately from those seen as
involving the interpretation of rules of law. The rule has been that the
decisions classified as discretionary may only be reviewed on limited
grounds such as the bad faith of decision-makers, the exercise of
discretion for an improper purpose, and the use of irrelevant
considerations. A general doctrine of "unreasonableness" has also
sometimes been applied to the discretionary decisions. In our opinion,
these doctrines incorporate two central ideas - those discretionary
decisions, like all other administrative decisions, must be made within
the bounds of the jurisdiction conferred by the statutory rules, but that
considerable deference will be given to the decision-makers by the
courts in reviewing the exercise of
that discretion and determining the scope of the decision-makers'
jurisdiction. These doctrines recognise that it is the intention of a
legislature, when using statutory language that confers broad choices
on the administrative agencies, that courts should not lightly interfere
with such decisions, and should give considerable respect to the
decision-makers when reviewing the manner in which discretion was
exercised. However, discretion must still be exercised in a manner that
is within a reasonable interpretation of the margin of manoeuvre
contemplated by the legislature, in accordance with the principles of
the rule of law.
103. Ms Madhavi Divan, the learned ASG has rightly relied on
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan10 in which this Court held that the
purpose of requiring an employee to furnish information regarding
prosecution/conviction, etc. in the verification form was to assess his
character and antecedents for the purpose of employment and
continuation in service; that suppression of material information and
making a false statement in reply to the queries relating to prosecution
and conviction had a clear bearing on the character, conduct and
antecedents of the employee; and that where it is found that the
employee had suppressed or given false information in regard to the
matters which had a bearing on his fitness or suitability to the post, he
could be terminated from service during the period of probation without
holding any inquiry. This Court also made it clear that neither the
gravity of the criminal offence nor the ultimate acquittal therein was
relevant when considering whether a probationer who suppresses a
material fact (of his being involved in a criminal case, in the personal
information furnished to the employer), is fit to be continued as a
probationer.
104. We find that the observations in the aforesaid case are fully
applicable to the appeal filed by Satish Chandra Yadav. We are of the
opinion that it was a deliberate attempt on the part of the appellant
Satish Chandra Yadav to withhold the relevant information and it is this
omission which has led to the termination of his service during the
probation period.
105. In view of the aforesaid, the appeal arising out of Special Leave
Petition (C) No. 20860 of 2019 filed by Satish Chandra Yadav fails and
is hereby dismissed.
106. So far as the connected appeal arising out of Special Leave
Petition (C) No. 5170 of 2021 filed by Pushpendra Kumar Yadav is
concerned, the same also fails on the very same line of reasoning
adopted by us. The only difference in the case of the appellant
Pushpendra Kumar Yadav is that he had put in about four years of
service before he came to be terminated.
107. In the result, both the appeals fail and are hereby dismissed
with no order as to costs.
108. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20860 of 2019. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Court, WP (C) No. 1167 of 2018, dt. 15-4-2019] [Affirmed]
#
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5170 of 2021. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Court, WP (C) No. 9456 of 2018, dt. 4-2-2020] [Affirmed]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
306
11
13
16
17
18
20
22
23
24
25
26
27
Methu Meda V. Union of India Writ Petition No. 3897 of 2013, order dated 27-9-2013 (MP)
29
30
Dillip Kumar Mallick V. Union of India Writ Appeal No. 223 of 2018, order dated 25-3-2019
(Ori)
33
34
35
&
38
39
40
41
42
376
44 Ibrahim V. R., 1914 AC 599 at p. 615 (PC)
45
46
47
*
Ed. : The word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.
48
Benjamin Cardozo, The Nature of The Judicial Process (Yale University Press, 1921).