&
(2022) 7 Supreme Court Cases 540 : (2022) 2 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE M.R. SHAH AND ANIRUDDHA BOSE, JJ.)
SUNIL KUMAR JAIN AND OTHERS
Appellants;
Versus
SUNDARESH BHATT AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 5910 of 2019-, decided on April 19, 2022
A. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - Ss. 5(13) and 53 - Claims of workmen/employees towards their
wages/salaries during CIRP - Payability of, as CIRP costs - Conditions
required to be satisfied for allowing such claim - Pendency of CIRP
proceedings alone (see in detail Shortnote B) - Insufficiency of, to allow
such claims
- Held, while considering the claims of the workmen/employees
concerned towards the wages/salaries payable during CIRP, first of all it
has to be established and proved that during CIRP, the corporate debtor
was a going concern and that the workmen/employees concerned actually
worked while the corporate debtor was a going concern during CIRP -
Further, as per S. 5(13) only with respect to those workmen/employees
who actually worked during CIRP when the corporate debtor was a going
concern, their wages/salaries are to be included in CIRP costs and they shall
have the first priority over all other dues as per S. 53(1)(a) - Also, any
other dues towards wages and salaries of the employees/workmen of the
corporate debtor shall have to be governed by Ss. 53(1)(b) and 53(1)(c)
- In the present case, there were disputes on whether the IRP/RP
managed the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern during
CIRP and whether Dahej Yard (ship building yard) was operational during
CIRP - Further, there was a serious dispute whether the
workmen/employees concerned of the Dahej Yard and the employees
concerned of the Mumbai Head Office actually worked during CIRP -
Therefore, appellants (workmen/employees) directed to submit their claims
before the liquidator and establish and prove that during CIRP, IRP/RP
managed the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern and
that they actually worked during CIRP - Labour Law - Insolvency, Winding
-up and Liquidation
(Paras 18 to 25)
B. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - Ss. 20, 5(13) and 53 - Pendency of CIRP proceedings alone -
Insufficiency of, to allow claims of workmen/employees towards their
wages/salaries during CIRP period i.e. to presume that the corporate
debtor was a going concern during CIRP period
- Though, under S. 20, it is the duty of the RP to manage and run the
operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern, however, the words
used in S. 20 are "the interim resolution professional shall make every
endeavour to
manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going
concern" -
Therefore, held, when it is found that the corporate debtor was not a going concern
during CIRP despite best efforts by the resolution professional, it cannot be
presumed that still the corporate debtor was a going concern - Labour Law -
Insolvency, Winding-up and Liquidation
(Para 23)
C. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - Ss. 36(4) and 53(1) - Provident fund, gratuity fund and pension
fund i.e. workmen's dues - Entitlement to, despite liquidation of corporate
debtor - S. 53(1) - Inapplicability of, to such dues which are to be treated
outside the liquidation process and liquidation estate assets under IBC
- S. 36(4) clearly gives outright protection to workmen's dues under
provident fund, gratuity fund and pension fund which are not to be treated
as liquidation estate assets and the Liquidator shall have no claim over such
dues - In the present case, held, the workmen/employees concerned shall
be entitled to provident fund, gratuity fund and pension fund from such
funds which are specifically kept out of liquidation estate assets and as per
S. 36(4), they are not to be used for recovery in the liquidation - Labour
Law - Insolvency, Winding-up and Liquidation
(Paras 24 and 25.2)
D. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - Ss. 5(13) and 53 - Adjudication of claims of workmen, regarding
wages/salaries during CIRP period, by liquidator - Necessity of, even when
such claims are not submitted by resolution professional
- While submitting the claims towards CIRP costs, the RP did not submit
the claims towards the wages/salaries of the appellants - Held, still the
claims submitted/to be submitted by the appellants (workmen) will have to
be adjudicated upon and considered by the Liquidator - Further, the
Liquidator has to adjudicate and consider, (i) whether the corporate debtor
was a going concern during CIRP; (ii) how many workmen/employees
actually worked during CIRP while the corporate debtor was a going concern
- Labour Law - Insolvency, Winding-up and Liquidation
(Para 21)
The corporate debtor was a private sector ship building yard with its
manufacturing activities at Dahej Yard and Surat Yard in Gujarat and having its
corporate office at Mumbai. That prior to the initiation of CIRP, the corporate debtor
had 562 workmen and 93 employees at Dahej; 291 workmen and 99 employees
at Surat and 101 employees at its Mumbai Head Office. The appellants herein are
the 272 employees and workmen employed at Mumbai Head Office and Dahej Yard
of the corporate debtor.
Vide its order dated 1-8-2017, the adjudicating authority had admitted an
application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ("the IB
Code") and CIRP was initiated.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the adjudicating
authority, not granting the relief to the appellants herein with regard to their claim
relating to salary/wages, which they claimed for the period involving CIRP and prior
period, the appellant workmen/employees working at Dahej Yard and
Mumbai Head Office preferred Company Appeal No. 605 of 2019 before the
Appellate Tribunal. By the impugned order, the Appellate Tribunal disposed of the
said appeal declining to interfere with the order passed by the adjudicating
authority, however, allowed the appellants - 272 workmen/employees to file their
individual claims before the liquidator, who after going through the record and taking
into consideration the pleadings made by the workmen/employees will determine
the claim. The Appellate Tribunal has also further observed that if claim of one or
other workmen/employee is rejected, it will be open to them to move before the
adjudicating authority, which may decide the same in accordance with law. The
Appellate Tribunal has also observed that so far as the gratuity and provident funds
are concerned, the same cannot be treated to be the asset of the corporate debtor
and they are to be disbursed amongst the employees/workmen who are entitled
for the same.
The issues before the Supreme Court were:
(1) Whether wages/salaries were payable to the workmen/employees during
CIRP period?
(2) Whether pension fund, gratuity fund and provident fund cannot be treated
to be the asset of the corporate debtor and they are to be disbursed amongst
the employees/workmen?
Held :
It cannot be disputed that as per Section 5(13) IBC, "insolvency resolution
process costs" shall include any costs incurred by the resolution professional in
running the business of the corporate debtor as a going concern. It is also true that
Section 20 IBC mandates that the interim resolution professional/resolution
professional is to manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going
concern and in case during CIRP the corporate debtor was a going concern, the
wages/salaries of such workmen/employees who actually worked, shall be included
in CIRP costs and in case of liquidation of the corporate debtor, dues towards the
wages and salaries of such workmen/employees who actually worked when the
corporate debtor was a going concern during CIRP, being a part of CIRP costs are
entitled to have the first priority and they have to be paid in full first as per Section
53(1)(a) IBC.
(Para 18)
Therefore, while considering the claims of the workmen/employees concerned
towards the wages/salaries payable during CIRP, first of all it has to be established
and proved that during CIRP, the corporate debtor was a going concern and that
the workmen/employees concerned actually worked while the corporate debtor
was a going concern during CIRP. The wages and salaries of all other
workmen/employees of the corporate debtor during CIRP who actually have not
worked and/or performed their duties when the corporate debtor was a going
concern, shall not be included automatically in CIRP costs. Only with respect to
those workmen/employees who actually worked during CIRP when the corporate
debtor was a going concern, their wages/salaries are to be included in CIRP costs
and they shall have the first priority over all other dues as per Section 53(1)(a) IBC.
Any other dues towards wages and salaries of the employees/workment of the
corporate debtor shall have to be governed by Section 53(1)(b) and Section 53(1)
(c)
IBC. Any other interpretation would lead to absurd consequences and violate the
scheme of Section 53 read with Section 5(13) IBC. If any other interpretation,
more particularly, the interpretation canvassed on behalf of the appellants is
accepted, in that case, the wages/salaries of those workmen/employees who had
not worked at all during CIRP shall have to be treated and/or included in CIRP costs,
which cannot be the intention of the legislature.
(Para 19)
On a fair reading of Section 5(13) IBC which defines "insolvency resolution
process costs", it is observed and held that the dues towards the wages/salaries of
only those workmen/employees who actually worked during CIRP are to be
included in CIRP costs. The rest of the claims towards the wages/salaries of the
workmen/employees shall be governed by Sections 53(1)(b) and (c) IBC.
(Para 20)
In the present case, the RP/Liquidator has seriously disputed that during CIRP,
the corporate debtor was a going concern. It is seriously disputed that the
respective appellants-workmen/employees employed at Dahej Yard and Mumbai
Head Office actually worked during CIRP. It is true that while submitting the claims
towards CIRP costs, the RP has not submitted the claims towards the
wages/salaries of the appellants, however, still the claims submitted/to be
submitted by the appellants will have to be adjudicated upon and considered by the
Liquidator and the Liquidator has to adjudicate and consider, (i) whether the
corporate debtor was a going concern during CIRP; (ii) how many
workmen/employees actually worked during CIRP while the corporate debtor was a
going concern.
(Para 21)
If on adjudication of the claims made by the respective workmen/employees, if
it is established and proved that during CIRP, the corporate debtor was a going
concern and the workmen/employees concerned actually worked during CIRP when
the corporate debtor was a going concern, the wages and salaries of such
workmen/employees to be included in CIRP costs as defined under Section 5(13)
IBC and they will have to be paid such wages/salaries as per Section 53(1)(a) IBC
as part of CIRP costs in full before making any payment as per priorities mentioned
in Section 53(1) IBC.
(Para 22)
It is true that under Section 20 IBC, it is the duty of the RP to manage and run
the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern. However, the words
used in Section 20 are "the interim resolution professional shall make every
endeavour to
manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going
concern". Therefore, even if it is found that the corporate debtor was not a going
concern during CIRP despite best efforts by the resolution professional, it cannot be
presumed that still the corporate debtor was a going concern during CIRP period. It
depends on the facts of each case. In a given case, the corporate debtor may be a
going concern and in a given case, the corporate debtor might not be a going
concern. Therefore, submission on behalf of the appellants that as the RP is under
mandate to manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern
under Section 20 IBC and therefore it is to be presumed that the RP managed the
operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern and therefore the
workmen/employees are entitled to their wages and salaries during CIRP, as their
wages/salaries to be
included in CIRP costs cannot be accepted. However, the wages and salaries of the
workmen/employees of pre-CIRP period will have to be governed as per the
priorities mentioned in Section 53(1) IBC.
(Para 23)
considered
Dues of the workmen/employees towards Provident Fund, Gratuity Fund
and Pension Fund
Now so far as the dues of the workmen/employees on account of provident
fund, gratuity and pension are concerned, they shall be governed by Section 36(4)
IBC. Section 36(4)(iii) IBC specifically excludes "all sums due to any workman or
employee from the provident fund, the pension fund and the gratuity fund", from
the ambit of "liquidation estate assets". Therefore, Section 53(1) IBC shall not be
applicable to such dues, which are to be treated outside the liquidation process and
liquidation estate assets under the IB Code. Thus, Section 36(4) IBC has clearly
given outright protection to workmen's dues under provident fund, gratuity fund
and pension fund which are not to be treated as liquidation estate assets and the
Liquidator shall have no claim over such dues. Therefore, the workmen/employees
concerned shall be entitled to provident fund, gratuity fund and pension fund from
such funds which are specifically kept out of liquidation estate assets and as per
Section 36(4) IBC, they are not to be used for recovery in the liquidation.
(Para 24)
VN-D/68851/CL
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Ms Shobha Ramamoorthy (Advocate-on-Record), Shilp Vinod, Nawaz
Sherif, M.A. Karthik, Vincy George, Gokulakrisnan and Ms Ritika Rao,
Advocates, for the Appellants;
Alok Tripathi (Advocate-on-Record), Parminder Singh Bhullar
(Advocate-on-Record), Rajeev Kr. Gupta, Dinesh Tripathi, Sanjay
Kumar, Sanjay Kr. Tyagi (Advocate-on-Record) and M/s Cyril
Amarchand Mangaldas (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates, for the
Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. V. Amit Gupta
548d, 560e
of India
548d, 549d, 560e
Sundaresh Bhatt
545b-c, 546c
Sundaresh Bhatt
562c-d
Sundaresh Bhatt
545a, 546f
V. ABG Shipyard Ltd.
545g
V. ABG Shipyard Ltd.
546a
ABG Shipyard Ltd.
545d-e
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
M.R. SHAH, J. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
impugned order dated 31-5-20191 passed by the National Company
Law Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "the
Appellate Tribunal") in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 605 of
2019, by which the Appellate Tribunal has dismissed the said appeal
preferred by the appellants herein - workmen/employees of M/s ABG
Shipyard Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "the corporate debtor"),
working at Dahej and Mumbai, which was filed against the order passed
by the National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad Bench, Ahmedabad
(hereinafter referred to as "the adjudicating authority") dated 25-4-
2019 not granting any relief to them with regard to their claim relating
2
to salary, which they claimed for the period involving "corporate
insolvency resolution process" (hereinafter referred to as "CIRP") and
the prior period, original applicants - workers/employees have
preferred the present appeal.
2. That the corporate debtor was a private sector ship building yard
with its manufacturing activities at Dahej Yard and Surat Yard in
Gujarat and having its corporate office at Mumbai. That prior to the
initiation of CIRP, the corporate debtor had 562 workmen and 93
employees at Dahej; 291 workmen and 99 employees at Surat and 101
employees at its Mumbai Head Office. The appellants herein are the 272
employees and workmen employed at Mumbai Head Office and Dahej
Yard of the corporate debtor. None of the 201 employees and workmen
at Surat Yard are the appellants herein.
3. Vide its order dated 1-8-2017 ³, the adjudicating authority
admitted an application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as "the IB Code") and
the CIRP was initiated. The adjudicating authority also appointed the
interim resolution professional of the corporate debtor who was
thereafter confirmed as the resolution professional (for short "RP") by
the Committee of Creditors (for short "CoC") of the corporate debtor on
7-9-2017. First meeting of the CoC was held on 4-9-2017.
3.1. On 23-10-2017, Company Application No. 348 of 2017 was filed
before the adjudicating authority, praying inter alia to direct the
resolution professional to make payment to the employees and the
workmen. On 9-3-2018, the appellants herein filed Company
Application No. 78 of 2018 in Company Application No. 348 of 2017
before the adjudicating authority, praying inter alia to direct the RP to
utilise the amount of Rs 9,75,33,236 to be received from the Indian
Coast Guard solely for employees/workmen,
3.2. Vide order dated 25-4-2018 passed in Company Application
No. 78 of 2018, the adjudicating authority directed the RP to deposit Rs
2,75,00,000 in the Registry of the adjudicating authority, subject to the
outcome of Company Application No. 348 of 2017. In the meantime, in
the 4th meeting of the
CoC held on 8-12-2017, the issue with respect to the payment of
salaries/wages of the employees/workers respectively was discussed in
view of the directions passed by the adjudicating authority vide its
order dated 1-12-20175. However, the issue was not resolved and
thereafter the appellants herein filed the aforesaid IA No. 78 of 2018 in
which the adjudicating authority directed to deposit Rs 2.75 crores out
of the total amount of Rs 9,75,33,236 with the Registry of NCLT
towards disbursement of the outstanding salaries/wages to the
appellants, subject to the final outcome of IA No. 348 of 2017 and the
adjudicating authority accordingly disposed of Company Application No.
78 of 2018.
3.3. It appears that thereafter since no agreed resolution plan could
be adopted of the corporate debtor, the RP filed IA No. 113 of 2019
before the adjudicating authority praying for an order of liquidation of
corporate debtor. The adjudicating authority by order dated 25-4-
2019², after deciding various other applications including the
application of the appellants being Company Application No. 348 of
2017 passed an order of liquidation of the corporate debtor and
appointed Respondent 1 herein as liquidator of the corporate debtor.
While passing the order of liquidation, the adjudicating authority also
disposed of Company Application No. 348 of 2017 in view of the order
passed in Company Application No. 78 of 2018 by which the
adjudicating authority earlier directed to deposit Rs 2.75 crores towards
the dues of the appellants which as such was subject to the final
outcome of Company Application No. 348 of 2017. Therefore, as such,
the adjudicating authority while disposing of Company Application No.
348 of 2017 did not grant the relief claimed by the appellants - 272
workers/employees working at Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head Office for
their claim relating to salary for the period involving CIRP and the prior
period.
4. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the
adjudicating authority, not granting the relief to the appellants herein
with regard to their claim relating to salary/wages, which they claimed
for the period involving CIRP and prior period, the appellant
workmen/employees working at Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head Office
preferred Company Appeal No. 605 of 2019 before the Appellate
Tribunal. By the impugned order1, the Appellate Tribunal has disposed
of the said appeal declining to interfere with the order passed by the
adjudicating authority, however, allowed the appellants - 272
workmen/employees to file their individual claims before the liquidator,
who after going through the record and taking into consideration the
pleadings made by the workmen/employees will determine the claim.
The Appellate Tribunal has also further observed that if claim of one or
other workmen/employee is rejected, it will be open to them to move
before the adjudicating authority, which may decide the same in
accordance with law. The Appellate Tribunal has
also observed that so far as the gratuity and provident funds are
concerned, the same cannot be treated to be the asset of the corporate
debtor and they are to be disbursed amongst the employees/workment
who are entitled for the same.
5. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order
passed by the Appellate Tribunal, the appellant workmen/employees of
the corporate debtor working at Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head Office
have preferred the present appeal.
6. Ms Shobha Ramamoorthy, learned Advocate appearing on behalf
of the appellants has vehemently submitted that in the present case
the respective appellants are all the workmen and employees-272 in
number and were employed at Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head Office of
the corporate debtor. It is submitted that in the present case, the CIRP
period commenced from 1-8-2017 and ended on 25-4-2019-
commencement of liquidation. It is submitted that for this entire period
of 20 months and 25 days, the respective employees and workmen
were on the payrolls of the corporate debtor. It is submitted that the RP
did not terminate the employment contracts or retrench or layoff the
workmen. It is submitted that on the other hand, RP issued instructions
dated 4-9-2017 to all the employees and workmen to report to him and
follow his instructions. It is submitted that on 15-11-2017, RP issued
an email to HR Department of corporate debtor instructing strictly not
to relieve or permit resignation of any employee/workmen, without
written approval.
6.1. It is further submitted that in the present case, the corporate
debtor was managed as a going concern in accordance with Section 21
IBC. It is submitted that even the proposal to suspend operations at
Dahej Yard and provide workmen with paid leave was rejected by the
CoC for lack of majority. It is submitted that therefore when the
corporate debtor was managed as a going concern, which as such is
mandatory under Section 19 IBC and when the operations at Dahej
Yard were not suspended, the workmen/employees at Dahej Yard are
entitled to at least the wages/salaries during the CIRP period. It is
submitted that irrespective of whether the wages/salaries for the period
during CIRP are to be qualified as CIRP cost or not, provident fund,
gratuity and pension fund are to be paid to the workmen and
employees at Dahej Yard under Section 36(4) IBC in priority over other
dues, which are also not paid till date.
6.2. It is further submitted that in the present case, throughout the
CIRP period, the employees and workmen of Dahej Yard were asked to
assemble at ABG Enclave and sign the attendance register since
transportation to the yard was discontinued by the RP. It is submitted
that throughout the CIRP period, the employees of Mumbai office had
regularly attended the office; recorded their attendance with the
Attendance Reader installed at the Mumbai office. The learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants has relied upon some documents
from the paper book as well as rejoinder affidavit in respect of proof of
work done by the respective employees/workment during the CIRP
period.
6.3. It is submitted that all claims filed by the employees/workmen
in Form E with the liquidator have been verified. It is submitted that
the verified and admitted claims of the employees and workmen of the
corporate debtor for CIRP period on the basis of the records available
including the attendance register have been uploaded by the
RP/Liquidator on 24-12-2020 on the official website of the corporate
debtor as per the regulations. It is submitted that therefore further
verification in respect of the claims of the appellants based on their
actual attendance is vexatious.
6.4. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has
taken us to the relevant provisions of IBC in support of her submission
that the workmen/employees of the Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head
Office are at least entitled to the wages/salaries during the period of
CIRP and are also entitled to the amount due and payable towards
provident fund, gratuity and pension. The learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellants has taken us to Section 3(36); Section 5(13);
Section 5(14); Section 5(23); Section 17, Section 18; Section 19;
Section 20; Section 25; Section 33(7); Section 36(4) and Section 53
IBC.
6.5. It is further submitted that the objective of the IB Code is for
maximising of value of assets of the corporate debtor so that they are
efficiently run as a going concern. Reliance is placed on the decision of
this Court in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. V. Union of India 6 (para 37); and in
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. V. Amit Gupta-Superscript(2) (para 57).
6.6. It is submitted that even under Section 20(1) IBC, the RP is
mandated to manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a going
concern. It is submitted that for this purpose he is vested with the
authority to issue instructions to the personnel of the corporate debtor
as may be necessary for keeping the corporate debtor as a going
concern. It is submitted that the RP is under the mandate to take all
such actions as are necessary to keep the corporate debtor as a going
concern.
6.7. It is submitted that Section 5(13) IBC defines "insolvency
resolution process cost". It is submitted that as per Section 5(13) of
the Code, "insolvency resolution process cost" means any costs incurred
by the RP in running the business of the corporate debtor as a going
concern and any other costs as may be specified by the IBBI -
liquidator. It is submitted that in the present case, vide Circular dated
12-6-2018, the liquidator had clearly provided the costs on account of
employees and workmen under the head "other services in a running
business" in Forms I, II and III submitted by the RP with respect to
CIRP costs incurred by him. It is submitted that therefore the
salaries/wages and the dues payable to the employees/workment during
the CIRP period will be qualified as CIRP costs under Section 5(13) IBC
and are liable to be disbursed even prior to the amount distributed
under Section 53 IBC.
6.8. It is further submitted that even otherwise the provident fund,
gratuity and pension fund amounts remain outside the liquidation
under Section 36(4) IBC. It is submitted that the obligation to pay the
provident fund, gratuity fund
amount would arise as soon as the employees and workmen are
deemed to have been discharged under Section 33(7) IBC. It is
submitted that even the workmen/employees are required to be paid
the wages/salaries for the pre-CIRP period as per the priorities
mentioned in Section 53 IBC.
6.9. It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellants that the salaries and wages payable to the
workmen/employees for the CIRP period are a component of the
resolution professional costs and therefore the CIRP period salaries and
wages payable to the respective workmen/employees are to be first
paid and are not to be paid "pari passu" in terms of Sections 53(1)(b)
and (c) IBC. It is submitted that even the "workmen's dues" is
explained in Explanation (ii) to Section 53 of the Code as the term
having the same meaning as assigned to it in Section 326 of the
Companies Act, 2013. It is submitted that Section 327 of the
Companies Act provides for preferential payments upon winding up of a
company, enlists the component of the wages or salary and dues
payable to an employee under clauses (b), (c), (e) and (f) under sub-
section (1).
6.10. It is submitted that thus on a combined reading of the
provisions of Sections 326 and 327 of the Companies Act, it is clear
that the workmen's dues and the employee's dues are comprised of
several components including wages or salary, holiday remuneration,
sums due from the provident fund, pension fund and the gratuity fund
amongst other items. It is submitted that as observed by this Court in
Swiss Ribbons6, the costs and expenses of the RP/liquidator are to be
given preferential treatment by excepting them from the pari passu
principle.
6.11. It is submitted that Rs 2.75 crores are earmarked and kept
apart towards the dues of the workmen/employees. It is submitted that
therefore the said sum of Rs 2.75 crores which is deposited for the
benefit of the workmen/employees is liable to be disbursed in terms of
Section 53(1)(a) read with Section 5(13)(c) IBC. It is submitted that
the amount in the sum of Rs 16.8 crores (approximately) payable
towards the provident fund, gratuity and pension in terms of Section 36
(4) to all the employees and workmen of the corporate debtor including
the appellants and therefore is required to be paid in priority over the
disbursement to be made under Sections 53(1)(b) and (c).
6.12. Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid
decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
7. The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Nakul Dewan,
learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent 1 -
Liquidator of corporate debtor.
7.1. Shri Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf
of the Liquidator of corporate debtor has vehemently submitted that the
wages and salaries claimed by the appellants who have done no work
during the CIRP period and have not assisted the RP/Liquidator during
the CIRP, would not fall within the parameters of CIRP costs within the
definition of Section 5(13)(c) IBC.
7.2. It is submitted that only 8 employees at the Mumbai location
for eight months during the CIRP and workmen/employees from Surat
(from August 2017 to October 2017) assisted the RP in providing
services required under the CIRP process. It is submitted that the
remaining employees and workmen including the appellants herein
were not required to and did not perform any services to run the
corporate debtor during the CIRP period. It is submitted that therefore
the CoC of the corporate debtor rightly did not approve any payments
to the appellants as part of the CIRP costs. It is submitted that the
wages and salaries of the appellants - workmen/employees of the
corporate debtor would fall under Sections 53(1)(b) and 53(1)(c) IBC.
7.3. It is submitted that as per Section 5(13)(c) IBC read with
Regulations 31 and 33 of the CIRP Regulations, cost incurred by the RP
in running the business of the corporate debtor is required to be ratified
by the CoC for it to be classified as CIRP costs. It is submitted that only
the costs for those employees who have assisted the RP during the
CIRP period, have been approved by the CoC in the first CoC meeting,
held on 4-9-2017. It is submitted that therefore no other costs can be
classified as CIRP costs, except unless it is ratified by the CoC. It is
submitted that the remaining dues of the workmen will form part of the
dues falling under Section 53(1)(b) IBC.
7.4. It is submitted that in the meetings of the CoC held periodically
right from first meeting to fourth meeting, it was specifically recorded
that the Dahej Shipyard is not operational and that the corporate
debtor is not in a position to pay the salaries of the workmen and
employees due to paucity of funds since the corporate debtor was not a
going concern and did not have a running business.
7.5. It is further submitted that the main business of the corporate
debtor was shipbuilding and ship repairing which was carried out at its
Yards at Surat and Dahej. It is submitted that the Yard at Dahej was
not in operation since 2015 and the Yard at Surat was closed in October
2017 and therefore it cannot be said that the corporate debtor was a
going concern during the CIRP and therefore all its employees would be
required to be treated as those who assisted the RP to run the
corporate debtor as a going concern.
7.6. It is further submitted that as such there is no evidence to
suggest that the respective workmen/employees deployed at Dahej
Yard and Mumbai Head Office have actually worked during the CIRP
period. It is therefore submitted that the Appellate Tribunal has rightly
observed that the respective workmen/employees can at least have to
prove their claims before the RP/Liquidator by submitting their
respective claims and the same are required to be adjudicated upon
and/or verified by the Liquidator. It is submitted that therefore the
Appellate Tribunal has rightly not interfered with the order passed by
the adjudicating authority in not passing any order in favour of the
workmen/employees.
7.7. It is further submitted that Section 53 IBC sets out the
waterfall mechanism in terms of which the dues of the creditors are
paid. It is submitted that even the operational creditors fall sixth in line
after payment of CIRP dues,
dues of secured creditors, etc. It is submitted that even after the
corporate debtor goes into liquidation in terms of Section 33 IBC, the
dues of the employees and workmen being operational creditors would
be paid in last in terms of the waterfall mechanism of Section 53(1)(f)
IBC. It is therefore submitted that the respective appellants -
workmen/employees are not entitled to any wages/salaries for the
period during CIRP as CIRP costs, as claimed by them.
7.8. Shri Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf
of Respondent 1 - RP/Liquidator has further submitted that the costs
incurred during the CIRP period by the corporate debtor/RP will qualify
as CIRP costs only with respect to costs incurred by the RP running the
company as a going concern under Section 5(13)(c) IBC and in a case
where the same has been approved by the CoC under Regulations 31
and 33 of the CIRP Regulations.
7.9. It is submitted that in the present case the corporate debtor is
neither a going concern nor the RP has incurred any costs. It is
submitted that therefore the wages/salaries of the workmen/employees
at the Dahej Yard cannot be included in the CIRP costs.
7.10. It is further submitted that after the commencement of the
CIRP, workmen and employee's dues which are outstanding as on the
date of CIRP, are treated as operational creditors in terms of Sections 5
(20) and 5(21) IBC. It is submitted that in terms of Section 30(2)(b)
IBC, the amount payable to operational creditors by a prospective
resolution applicant shall not be less than the amount to be paid to
such creditors in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor
under Section 53; OR the amount that would have been paid to such
creditors, if the amount to be distributed under the resolution plan had
been distributed in accordance with the order of priority in sub-section
(1) of Section 53, whichever is higher.
7.11. It is submitted that Section 53 IBC sets out the waterfall
mechanism in terms of which the dues of the creditors are paid. It is
submitted that operational creditors fall sixth in line after payment of
CIRP dues, dues of secured creditors, etc.
7.12. It is submitted that in the present case, it is only few of the
Surat workmen/employees and 8 Mumbai employees who have
rendered services during the CIRP period to assist the RP to complete
the CIRP process whose dues would be treated as CIRP costs.
Otherwise, all dues of employees and workmen which have accrued
prior to CIRP would be paid in terms of Section 53(1)(f) IBC, both
during CIRP and during liquidation. It is submitted that in the present
case, the Liquidator has accepted the claim filed by the workmen and
employees. However, the said claims filed by the workmen/employees
cannot be considered as CIRP costs and cannot be paid in priority to all
other claims. The treatment of the said claims of the workmen and
employees have to be treated in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 53(1)(b)(i) and 53(1)(c) IBC respectively, as applicable and
not as CIRP costs.
7.13. It is submitted that in the present case the appellants who are
the workmen at Dahej Yard and employees at Mumbai Head Office, did
not help to maintain the corporate debtor as a going concern, since (i)
the corporate debtor was never a going concern and (ii) the Dahej Yard
was not in operation since June 2015; and (iii) operations at the Surat
Shipyard were completely shut from October 2017. It is submitted that
therefore the appellants who are the workmen of the Dahej Yard and
employees of the Mumbai Head Office, cannot claim any amounts
towards wages/salaries for the CIRP period, since no work/services
were rendered by them, except for the critical Mumbai employees
whose salaries were ratified by the CoC during the first CoC meeting.
7.14. Making the above submissions, it is submitted that the wages
and salaries of the workmen/employees at Dahej Yard and the
employees at Mumbai Head Office, except those who worked during the
CIRP period, cannot be included and/or considered as CIRP costs and
therefore they have to be paid as per the waterfall mechanism
mentioned in Sections 53(1)(b) and (c) IBC.
7.15. It is submitted that therefore the respective workmen
employed at Dahej Yard and some of the employees employed at
Mumbai Head Office were required to submit their individual claims and
they have to establish before the RP/Liquidator that in fact they actually
worked during the CIRP period, the Appellate Tribunal has rightly
observed that the respective workmen/employees have to submit their
claims before the RP/Liquidator, who is required to verify whether the
corporate debtor was a going concern during the CIRP period and
whether in fact the workmen/employees concerned actually worked
during the CIRP period or not. It is submitted that therefore no
interference of this Court is called for.
8. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at
length.
9. The issue before this Court is with respect to wages/salaries of the
workmen/employees during the CIRP period and the amount due and
payable to the respective workmen/employees towards pension fund,
gratuity fund and provident fund.
Relevant provisions of the IB Code
10. While considering the aforesaid claims, the legislative history
and the relevant provisions of the IB Code are required to be referred
to:
10.1. Section 3(36)
"3. (36) "workman" shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (s) of Section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14
of 1947);"
10.2. Section 5(13)
"5. (13) "insolvency resolution process costs" means-
(a) the amount of any interim finance and the costs incurred in
raising such finance;
(b) the fees payable to any person acting as a resolution
professional;
(c) any costs incurred by the resolution professional in running
the business of the corporate debtor as a going concern;
(d) any costs incurred at the expense of the Government to
facilitate the insolvency resolution process; and
(e) any other costs as may be specified by the Board;"
10.3. Section 5(14)
"5. (14) "insolvency resolution process period" means the
period of one hundred and eighty days beginning from the
insolvency commencement date and ending on one hundred and
eightieth day;"
10.4. Section 17
"17. Management of affairs of corporate debtor by interim
resolution professional.- (1) From the date of appointment of the
interim resolution professional-
(a) the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor shall
vest in the interim resolution professional;
(b) the powers of the board of directors or the partners of the
corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall stand suspended and
be exercised by the interim resolution professional;
(c) the officers and managers of the corporate debtor shall
report to the interim resolution professional and provide access to
such documents and records of the corporate debtor as may be
required by the interim resolution professional;
(d) the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the
corporate debtor shall act on the instructions of the interim
resolution professional in relation to such accounts and furnish all
information relating to the corporate debtor available with them to
the interim resolution professional.
(2) The interim resolution professional vested with the
management of the corporate debtor shall-
(a) act and execute in the name and on behalf of the corporate
debtor all deeds, receipts, and other documents, if any;
(b) take such actions, in the manner and subject to such
restrictions, as may be specified by the Board;
(c) have the authority to access the electronic records of
corporate debtor from information utility having financial
information of the corporate debtor;
(d) have the authority to access the books of account, records
and other relevant documents of corporate debtor available with
government authorities, statutory auditors, accountants and such
other persons as [may be specified; and]
[(e) be responsible for complying with the requirements under
any law for the time being in force on behalf of the corporate
debtor.]"
10.5. Section 20
"20. Management of operations of corporate debtor as
going concern.-(1) The interim resolution professional shall make
every endeavour to protect and preserve the value of the property of
the corporate debtor and manage the operations of the corporate
debtor as a going concern.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the interim resolution
professional shall have the authority-
(a) to appoint accountants, legal or other professionals as may
be necessary;
(b) to enter into contracts on behalf of the corporate debtor or
to amend or modify the contracts or transactions which were
entered into before the commencement of corporate insolvency
resolution process;
(c) to raise interim finance provided that no security interest
shall be created over any encumbered property of the corporate
debtor without the prior consent of the creditors whose debt is
secured over such encumbered property:
Provided that no prior consent of the creditor shall be required
where the value of such property is not less than the amount
equivalent to twice the amount of the debt.
(d) to issue instructions to personnel of the corporate debtor as
may be necessary for keeping the corporate debtor as a going
concern; and
(e) to take all such actions as are necessary to keep the
corporate debtor as a going concern."
10.6. Section 25
"25. Duties of resolution professional.- - (1) It shall be the
duty of the resolution professional to preserve and protect the assets
of the corporate debtor, including the continued business operations
of the corporate debtor.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the resolution
professional shall undertake the following actions, namely-
(a) take immediate custody and control of all the assets of the
corporate debtor, including the business records of the corporate
debtor;
(b) represent and act on behalf of the corporate debtor with
third parties, exercise rights for the benefit of the corporate
debtor in judicial, quasi-judicial or arbitration proceedings;
(c) raise interim finances subject to the approval of the
committee of creditors under Section 28;
(d) appoint accountants, legal or other professionals in the
manner as specified by Board;
(e) maintain an updated list of claims;
(f) convene and attend all meetings of the committee of
creditors;
(g) prepare the information memorandum in accordance with
Section 29;
(h) invite prospective resolution applicants, who fulfil such
criteria as may be laid down by him with the approval of
committee of the creditors, having regard to the complexity and
scale of operations of the business of the corporate debtor and
such other conditions as may be specified by the Board, to submit
a resolution plan or plans;
(i) present all resolution plans at the meetings of the
committee of creditors;
(j) file application for avoidance of transactions in accordance
with Chapter III, if any; and
(k) such other actions as may be specified by the Board."
10.7. Section 33(7)
"33. (7) The order for liquidation under this section shall be
deemed to be a notice of discharge to the officers, employees and
workmen of the corporate debtor, except when the business of the
corporate debtor is continued during the liquidation process by the
liquidator."
10.8. Section 36(4)
"36.
Liquidation
Estate.-(1)- -
(3)
*
*
*
(4) The following shall not be included in the liquidation estate
assets and shall not be used for recovery in the liquidation-
(a) assets owned by a third party which are in possession of
the corporate debtor, including-
(i) assets held in trust for any third party;
(ii) bailment contracts;
(iii) all sums due to any workman or employee from the
provident fund, the pension fund and the gratuity fund;
(iv) other contractual arrangements which do not stipulate
transfer of title but only use of the assets; and
(v) such other assets as may be notified by the Central
Government in consultation with any financial sector regulator;
(b) assets in security collateral held by financial services
providers and are subject to netting and set-off in multilateral
trading or clearing transactions;
(c) personal assets of any shareholder or partner of a corporate
debtor as the case may be provided such assets are not held on
account of avoidance transactions that may be avoided under this
Chapter;
(d) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the corporate
debtor; or
(e) any other assets as may be specified by the Board,
including assets which could be subject to set-off on account of
mutual dealings between the corporate debtor and any creditor."
10.9. Section 53
"53. Distribution of assets.-(1) Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in any law enacted by the Parliament or any
State Legislature for the time being in force, the proceeds from the
sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the following
order of priority and within such period and in such manner as may
be specified, namely-
(a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the liquidation
costs paid in full;
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and
among the following-
(i) workmen's dues for the period of twenty-four months
preceding the liquidation commencement date; and
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such
secured creditor has relinquished security in the manner set
out in Section 52;
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than
workmen for the period of twelve months preceding the
liquidation commencement date;
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors;
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among
the following-
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State
Government including the amount to be received on account of
the Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of a
State, if any, in respect of the whole or any part of the period
of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date;
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid
following the enforcement of security interest;
(f) any remaining debts and dues;
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be.
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under sub-
section (1) with equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority
under that sub-section shall be disregarded by the liquidator.
(3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted
proportionately from the proceeds payable to each class of recipients
under sub-section (1), and the proceeds to the relevant recipient
shall be distributed after such deduction.
Explanation. - -For the purpose of this section-
(i) it is hereby clarified that at each stage of the distribution of
proceeds in respect of a class of recipients that rank equally, each
of the debts will either be paid in full, or will be paid in equal
proportion within the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are
insufficient to meet the debts in full; and
(ii) the term "workmen's dues" shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in Section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18
of 2013)."
Legislative history with respect to workmen/employee's dues
towards the wages/salaries including the amount due and
payable towards provident fund, gratuity and pension fund
11. Under the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as "the
1956 Act"), Section 59-A provided that workmen's dues and debts due
to secured creditors in terms of Section 529-A(1)(c) of the 1956 Act
shall be paid in priority to other debts. Further, it provided that in case
of insolvent company, winding up should be undertaken in terms of
laws of insolvency with respect to the status of persons adjudged
insolvent.
12. The proviso to Section 59(1) of the 1956 Act provided that
workmen shall deem to have pari passu charge in his favour to the
extent of workmen's portion. It further stated that where the secured
creditor (instead of relinquishing) is enforcing his security, the debt due
to the extent of workmen's share/portion in the security shall rank pari
passu with workmen's dues for the purposes of Section 529-A. The said
section was brought in by way of the Companies (Amendment) Bill,
1985 with the objective to introduce necessary legislation for the
legitimate dues of workers rank pari passu with the secured creditors in
the event of the closure of the Company. The laudable objective was
that in the unfortunate event of liquidation, workers whose labour and
effort constitute an invisible but easily perceivable part of the capital of
the company, are not deprived of their legitimate right to participate in
the product of their labour and effort.
13. Section 530 of the 1956 Act provided the waterfall mechanism
as per which priority is to be given to different kinds of debts.
Subsequently, the Companies Bill, 2009 and 2011 were introduced
wherein wages/salaries payable to workmen for a period of 2 years were
protected in case of winding up of the Company. Thereafter, under the
Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as "the 2013 Act"),
Section 326 and Section 327 i.e. "Overriding Preferential Payment" and
"Preferential Payments" were introduced wherein a proviso to Section
326 of the 2013 Act was inserted. Initially the insolvency process in
case of winding up of insolvent companies were provided under Section
325 of the 2013 Act. However, Section 325 of the 2013 Act was
omitted w.e.f. 15-11-2016 on the coming into force of the IB Code. On
enactment of the IB Code, the winding-up proceedings in case of
insolvency are to be governed by the provisions of the IB Code and the
provisions of the IB Code only shall be applicable to deal with the
winding-up proceedings as the IB Code is a complete Code in itself.
That thereafter, an amendment w.e.f. 15-11-2016 has been brought in
under Section 327(7) of the 2013 Act wherein it has been clarified that
the provisions of Section 326 and Section 327 of the 2013 Act will not
be applicable in the event of liquidation under the IB Code.
14. In case of any insolvency, in a winding up of a company under
Sections 326 and 327 of the Companies Act, the workmen's dues are to
be paid as under:
14.1. Workmen's portion in the security shall be paid in priority to
all other debts.
14.2. However, workmen's dues [given in (b)(i) and (ii) payable for
the period of 24 months, shall be paid in priority to all other debts
(including debts due to secured creditors)]. This means that
wages/salary for the period of 24 months is over and above every other
claim/debts (including debts due to secured creditors).
14.3. Workmen's dues include provident fund, pension fund and
gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of the workmen
maintained by the Company.
15. Under the IB Code, the workmen's dues have been duly
protected and the provident fund, gratuity and pension fund have been
excluded from the liquidation estate assets [Section 36(4) IBC].
Furthermore, as per Section 53 IBC, the workmen's dues are given the
top priority in the waterfall mechanism.
16. The issue of giving priority to the workmen's dues have been
considered time and again in the various Committee's Reports:
In the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (Volume 1)
(November 2015), it was agreed that the assets held in by the entity
in trust (such as employee pensions), assets held as collateral to
certain financial market institutions and assets held as part of
operational transactions where the entity has right over the asset but
is not the owner of the same shall be excluded from the liquidation
estate. Furthermore, it was also debated with respect to the waterfall
mechanism under the Code and was agreed that the workmen's dues
capped up to 3 months will be given the second priority with the
secured creditor after the costs of the corporate insolvency and
resolution process and liquidation.
Subsequently, a report of the Joint Committee on the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, 2015 was prepared and presented in Lok
Sabha on 28-4-2016 wherein the issue of exclusion of provident
fund, pension fund and gratuity fund from the liquidation estate
assets and estate of bankrupt was debated. The Committee, after in-
depth examination, was of the view that provident fund, pension
fund and gratuity fund provide the social safety net to the workmen
and employees and hence, need to be secured in the event of
liquidation of a company or bankruptcy of partnership firm. The
Committee observed that the workers are the nerve centre of any
company and in the event of any company becoming insolvent or
bankrupt, the workmen get affected adversely and therefore, priority
must be given to their outstanding dues. Therefore, all sums due to
any workman or employee from the provident fund, gratuity fund or
pension fund should not be included in the liquidation estate assets.
Thus, to protect the interest
of the workmen, the Committee decided that that the workmen's dues
for a period of 12 months as provided under Section 53 of the Code be
increased to 24 months preceding liquidation commencement date.
In light of the same, Section 36 of the Code has clearly given
outright protection to workmen's dues under provident fund, pension
fund and gratuity fund which is not treated as liquidation assets and
liquidator has no claim over such funds. Therefore, this share of
workmen's dues has consciously been taken outside the liquidation
process.
17. In light of the above statutory provisions under the IB Code and
the legislative history, the claims of the workmen/employees towards
wages/salaries prior to CIRP and during the CIRP are required to be
considered.
18. It cannot be disputed that as per Section 5(13) IBC, "insolvency
resolution process costs" shall include any costs incurred by the
resolution professional in running the business of the corporate debtor
as a going concern. It is also true that Section 20 IBC mandates that
the interim resolution professional/resolution professional is to manage
the operations of the corporate debtor as a going concern and in case
during the CIRP the corporate debtor was a going concern, the
wages/salaries of such workmen/employees who actually worked, shall
be included in the CIRP costs and in case of liquidation of the corporate
debtor, dues towards the wages and salaries of such
workmen/employees who actually worked when the corporate debtor
was a going concern during the CIRP, being a part of the CIRP costs are
entitled to have the first priority and they have to be paid in full first as
per Section 53(1)(a) IBC.
19. Therefore, while considering the claims of the
workmen/employees concerned towards the wages/salaries payable
during CIRP, first of all it has to be established and proved that during
CIRP, the corporate debtor was a going concern and that the
workmen/employees concerned actually worked while the corporate
debtor was a going concern during the CIRP. The wages and salaries of
all other workmen/employees of the corporate debtor during the CIRP
who actually have not worked and/or performed their duties when the
corporate debtor was a going concern, shall not be included
automatically in the CIRP costs. Only with respect to those
workmen/employees who actually worked during CIRP when the
corporate debtor was a going concern, their wages/salaries are to be
included in the CIRP costs and they shall have the first priority over all
other dues as per Section 53(1)(a) IBC. Any other dues towards wages
and salaries of the employees/workmen, of the corporate debtor shall
have to be governed by Section 53(1)(b) and Section 53(1)(c) IBC.
Any other interpretation would lead to absurd consequences and violate
the scheme of Section 53 read with Section 5(13) IBC. If any other
interpretation, more particularly, the interpretation canvassed on behalf
of the appellants is accepted, in that case, the wages/salaries of those
workmen/employees who had not worked at all during CIRP shall have
to be treated and/or included in the CIRP costs, which cannot be the
intention of the legislature.
20. On a fair reading of Section 5(13) IBC which defines "insolvency
resolution process costs", it is observed and held that the dues towards
the wages/salaries of only those workmen/employees who actually
worked during the CIRP are to be included in the CIRP costs. The rest
of the claims towards the wages/salaries of the workmen/employees, as
observed hereinabove, shall be governed by Sections 53(1)(b) and (c)
IBC.
21. In the present case, the RP/Liquidator has seriously disputed
that during the CIRP, the corporate debtor was a going concern. It is
seriously disputed that the respective appellants
-
workmen/employees employed at Dahej Yard and Mumbai Head Office
actually worked during the CIRP. It is true that while submitting the
claims towards CIRP costs, the RP has not submitted the claims
towards the wages/salaries of the appellants, however, still the claims
submitted/to be submitted by the appellants will have to be
adjudicated upon and considered by the Liquidator and the Liquidator
has to adjudicate and consider, (i) whether the corporate debtor was a
going concern during the CIRP; (ii) how many workmen/employees
actually worked during the CIRP while the corporate debtor was a going
concern.
22. If on adjudication of the claims made by the respective
workmen/employees, if it is established and proved that during CIRP,
the corporate debtor was a going concern and the workmen/employees
concerned actually worked during the CIRP when the corporate debtor
was a going concern, the wages and salaries of such
workmen/employees to be included in the CIRP costs as defined under
Section 5(13) IBC and they will have to be paid such wages/salaries as
per Section 53(1)(a) IBC as part of the CIRP costs in full before making
any payment as per priorities mentioned in Section 53(1) IBC.
23. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the appellants that as
per Section 20 IBC and even as per the decisions of this Court in Swiss
Ribbons6 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. V. Amit Gupta- the RP is
under mandate to manage the operations of the corporate debtor as a
going concern and therefore it is to be believed that during CIRP, the
corporate debtor was a going concern, managed and/or operated as a
going concern cannot be accepted. It is true that under Section 20 IBC,
it is the duty of the RP to manage and run the operations of the
corporate debtor as a going concern. However, the words used in
Section 20 are "the interim resolution professional shall make every
endeavour to manage the operations of the corporate debtor as
a
going concern". Therefore, even if it is found that the corporate debtor
was not a going concern during the CIRP despite best efforts by the
resolution professional, it cannot be presumed that still the corporate
debtor was a going concern during the CIRP period. It depends on the
facts of each case. In a given case, the corporate debtor may be a
going concern and in a given case, the corporate debtor might not be a
going concern. Therefore, submission on behalf of the appellants that
as the RP is under mandate to manage the operations of the corporate
debtor as a going concern under Section 20 IBC and therefore it is to
be presumed that the RP managed the operations of the corporate
debtor as a going concern and therefore the workmen/employees are
entitled to their wages and salaries during the CIRP, as their
wages/salaries to be included in the CIRP costs cannot be accepted.
However, the wages and salaries of the workmen/employees of pre-
CIRP period will have to be governed as per the priorities mentioned in
Section 53(1) IBC.
Dues of the workmen/employees towards provident fund,
gratuity fund and pension fund
24. Now so far as the dues of the workmen/employees on account of
provident fund, gratuity and pension are concerned, they shall be
governed by Section 36(4) IBC. Section 36(4)(iii) IBC specifically
excludes "all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident
fund, the pension fund and the gratuity fund", from the ambit of
"liquidation estate assets". Therefore, Section 53(1) IBC shall not be
applicable to such dues, which are to be treated outside the liquidation
process and liquidation estate assets under the IB Code. Thus, Section
36(4) IBC has clearly given outright protection to workmen's dues
under provident fund, gratuity fund and pension fund which are not to
be treated as liquidation estate assets and the Liquidator shall have no
claim over such dues. Therefore, the workmen/employees concerned
shall be entitled to provident fund, gratuity fund and pension fund from
such funds which are specifically kept out of liquidation estate assets
and as per Section 36(4) IBC, they are not to be used for recovery in
the liquidation.
25. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, it is held
as under:
25.1. That the wages/salaries of the workmen/employees of the
corporate debtor for the period during CIRP can be included in the CIRP
costs provided it is established and proved that the interim resolution
professional/resolution professional managed the operations of the
corporate debtor as a going concern during the CIRP and that the
workmen/employees concerned of the corporate debtor actually worked
during the CIRP and in such an eventuality, the wages/salaries of those
workmen/employees who actually worked during the CIRP period when
the resolution professional managed the operations of the corporate
debtor as a going concern, shall be paid treating it and/or considering it
as part of CIRP costs and the same shall be payable in full first as per
Section 53(1)(a) IBC.
25.2. Considering Section 36(4) IBC and when the provident fund,
gratuity fund and pension fund are kept out of the liquidation estate
assets, the share of the workmen's dues shall be kept outside the
liquidation process and the workmen/employees concerned shall have
to be paid the same out of such provident fund, gratuity fund and
pension fund, if any, available and the Liquidator shall not have any
claim over such funds.
26. As observed hereinabove, there are disputed questions, whether
in fact the IRP/RP managed the operations of the corporate debtor as a
going concern during the CIRP and there is a serious dispute whether
Dahej Yard was operational during the CIRP or not and there is a
serious dispute that the workmen/employees concerned of the Dahej
Yard and the employees
concerned of the Mumbai Head Office actually worked during the CIRP
or not and therefore it is directed that let the appellants submit their
claims before the Liquidator and establish and prove that during CIRP,
IRP/RP managed the operations of the corporate debtor as a going
concern and that they actually worked during the CIRP and the
Liquidator is directed to adjudicate such claims in accordance with law
and on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence which may be
laid/produced, irrespective of the fact whether the RP who himself is
now the Liquidator included the claims of the appellants being
wages/salaries during CIRP as CIRP costs or not. The Liquidator is
directed to adjudicate such claims independently.
27. If it is found that in fact the IRP/RP managed the operations of
the corporate debtor as a going concern during the CIRP and the
workmen/employees concerned actually worked during CIRP, their
wages and salaries be considered and included in CIRP costs and they
will have to be paid as per Section 53(1)(a) IBC in full before
distributing the amount in the priorities as mentioned in Section 53
IBC. The aforesaid exercise shall be completed within a period of twelve
weeks from today and such amount shall be paid out of the amount
which is directed to be kept aside earlier by the adjudicating
authority/Appellate Tribunal and thereafter by this Court Till such
claims are adjudicated upon, the Liquidator is directed to keep aside
the said amount exclusively to be used for the workmen/employee's
dues which is to be paid on adjudication as above.
28. The present appeal is partly allowed to the aforesaid extent and
disposed of accordingly. No costs.
+
OnLine NCLAT 259 [National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, Company Appeal (AT)
(Insolvency) No. 605 of 2019, dt. 31-5-2019] [Partly affirmed]
1
3
4
5
6
8