In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE M.R. SHAH AND KRISHNA MURARI, JJ.)
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH
Appellant;
Versus
NANDU ALIAS NANDUA
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 1356 of 2022 , decided on September 2, 2022
Penal Code, 1860 - S. 302 - Sentence/punishment less than
imprisonment for life, when accused is convicted for offence punishable
under S. 302 - Held, is impermissible, as punishment for murder under S.
302 is death or imprisonment for life and fine - Any punishment less than
imprisonment for life under S. 302 would be contrary to S. 302
- Criminal Trial - Sentence - Minimum sentence/Minimum statutory
sentence
(Paras 6 to 8)
Appeal allowed
Y-D/69158/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Ms Ankita Chaudhary, Deputy Advocate General [Amit Sharma and
Gopal Jha (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
M.P. (reversed)
184e
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
M.R. SHAH, J. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
impugned judgment and order1 passed by the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal No. 219 of 1995 by which the
High Court has partly allowed the said appeal preferred by the
respondent-accused Nandu alias Nandua and has reduced the sentence
from life imprisonment to the sentence already undergone while
maintaining his conviction for the offences under Sections 147, 148,
323 and 302/34 of the Penal Code, 1860 ("IPC"), the State has
preferred the present appeal.
2. We have heard Ms Ankita Chaudhary, learned Deputy Advocate
General appearing on behalf of the appellant State.
3. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the learned trial court
convicted the respondent-accused along with other accused for the
offence punishable under Sections 147, 148, 323 and 302/34 IPC and
sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment. However, by the
impugned judgment and order, though the High Court has maintained
the conviction of the accused for the offence under Sections 147, 148,
323 and 302/34 IPC by giving benefit of right to private defence, the
High Court has thereafter interfered with the sentence and reduced the
same to the sentence already undergone by him. At this stage,
it is required to be noted that by the time, the High Court passed the
impugned judgment and order reducing the sentence, the period of
sentence undergone by the respondent-accused was approximately
seven years and ten months.
4. Ms Ankita Chaudhary, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing
on behalf of the State has vehemently submitted that when the High
Court has maintained the conviction of the accused for the offence
punishable under Section 302 IPC, the punishment which can be
imposed would be punishment with death or imprisonment for life and
also fine, but in any case, it shall not be less than the imprisonment for
life.
5. It is vehemently submitted that once an accused is held to be
guilty for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC, the minimum
sentence, which is imposable would be the imprisonment for life and,
therefore, any punishment/sentence less than the imprisonment for life
shall be contrary to Section 302 IPC. It is submitted that therefore, the
High Court has committed a very serious error in reducing the sentence
to already undergone (seven years and ten months).
6. Having heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State
and considering the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court by which though the High Court has maintained the conviction of
the respondent-accused for the offence under Section 302 IPC, but the
High Court has reduced the sentence to already undergone i.e. seven
years and ten months, we are of the firm view that the same is
impermissible and unsustainable.
7. The punishment for murder under Section 302 IPC shall be death
or imprisonment for life and fine. Therefore, the minimum sentence
provided for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC would be
imprisonment for life and fine. There cannot be any
sentence/punishment less than imprisonment for life, if an accused is
convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. Any
punishment less than the imprisonment for life for the offence
punishable under Section 302 would be contrary to Section 302 IPC. By
the impugned judgment and order though the High Court has
specifically maintained the conviction of the accused for the offence
under Sections 147, 148, 323 and 302/34 IPC, but the High Court has
reduced the sentence to sentence already undergone which is less than
imprisonment for life, which shall be contrary to Section 302 IPC and is
unsustainable.
8. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the
present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by
the High Court reducing the sentence of the respondent-accused to the
sentence already undergone while maintaining the conviction of the
respondent-accused for the offence under Sections 147, 148, 323 and
302/34 IPC is hereby quashed and set aside. The judgment and order
passed by the learned trial court imposing the life imprisonment is
hereby restored. Now, the respondent-accused to be arrested and to
undergo life imprisonment for which we give eight weeks' time to the
accused to surrender before the Court/Jail Authority concerned.
+
(Madhya Pradesh High Court, CRA No. 219 of 1995, dt. 17-5-2019) [Reversed]
1