&
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE A.M. KHANWILKAR, DINESH MAHESHWARI AND C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.)
ASHISH SHELAR AND OTHERS
Petitioners;
Versus
MAHARASHTRA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND
ANOTHER
Respondents.
Writ Petitions (C) No. 797 of 2021 with Nos. 800, 807 and 808 of
2021, decided on January 28, 2022
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 212, 208, 32, 14 and 21 r/w Rr. 8 & 53
of the State Assembly Rules, 1985 - Exclusion of judicial review under Art.
212 re proceedings of the legislature - "Irregularity of procedure" - What
is - Suspension of MLAs by a resolution passed by Legislative Assembly -
Judicial review - Scope of - Principles clarified
- R. 53 of the 1985 Rules not only speaks about procedure to be
adopted for passing drastic order of withdrawal of a Member (suspension)
from House but also about substantive disciplinary or rationality of self-
security measure to be taken in a graded (objective standard) manner -
Non-compliance with or deviation from former (procedure) may be non-
justiciable - However, in regard to substantive disciplinary or rationality of
self-security measure inflicted upon erring Member, is open to judicial
review on touchstone of being unconstitutional, grossly illegal and irrational
or arbitrary - See in detail Shortnote B
-
Election - Political Parties, Politics and Government Formation -
Suspension/Expulsion from House Parliament and State Legislatures
-
Suspension/Expulsion from House - Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules,
1985, Rr. 8 and 53
B. Constitution of India - Arts. 208, 14 and 21 - Suspension of MLAs
beyond period prescribed under Rule for committing contempt of House -
Validity - Long suspension, held, is bound to affect rights harsher than
expulsion wherein a mid-term election is held within specified time in terms
of S. 151-A of 1951 Act, not later than six months - Thus, impugned
resolution suspending MLAs beyond period prescribed under Rule is invalid
- If resolution passed by House was to provide for suspension beyond period
prescribed under stated Rule, it would be substantively illegal, irrational and
unconstitutional - Inflicting suspension for a period "beyond the period necessary"
than to ensure smooth working/functioning of House during Session "by itself"; and
also, as per underlying objective standard specified in R. 53 of the 1985 Rules,
indubitably, suffer from vice of being grossly irrational measure adopted against
erring Member and also substantively illegal and unconstitutional
- Impugned resolution stated that it has been passed by majority votes in
House immediately after it was put to vote by Chairman - It was in fact introduced
as a motion for initiating action for having committed contempt of House which
ordinarily ought to have proceeded under Part XVIII of the 1985 Rules dealing with
privileges - That would have required constitution of a Committee of Privileges to
enquire into entire matter by giving opportunity of hearing to persons concerned -
Instead of adopting that procedure, House itself chose to direct withdrawal of
petitioners from meetings of Assembly for a period of one year, which direction is
neither ascribable to dispensation prescribed in Part XVIII or R. 53 of the 1985 Rules
enabling Speaker to do so - It is not a case of procedural irregularity as such
- Whereas, decision taken by House in present case, is one of substantive
illegality in directing suspension beyond period of remainder of Session in which
motion was presented - This is so because, period of suspension in excess of
period essential to do so much less in a graded manner including on principle
underlying R. 53 of the 1985 Rules, would be antithesis to rational or objective
standard approach for ensuring orderly functioning of House during ongoing Session
-
"Suspension" is necessarily linked to attendance of Member in House - Thus,
suspension may be resorted to merely for ensuring orderly conduct of business of
House during session concerned - Anything in excess of that would be irrational
suspension - This is so because Member represents constituency from where he
has been duly elected and longer suspension would entail in deprivation of
constituency to be represented in House - One year suspension is worse than
"expulsion", "disqualification" or "resignation" insofar as right of constituency to be
represented before House/Assembly is concerned - This is because, long
suspension is bound to affect rights harsher than expulsion wherein a mid-term
election is held within specified time in terms of S. 151-A of 1951 Act, not later than
six months - Thus, impugned resolution is unreasonable, irrational, and arbitrary
and liable to be set aside
- Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules, 1985 - R. 53 - Election -
Representation of the People Act, 1951, S. 151-A
C. Constitution of India - Arts. 208 and 21 - Rules of Procedure of
Legislative Assembly - Adherence to, by legislature - Extent to which
mandatory - Status acquired by such rules once framed - Principles
clarified
- Even though legislature has prerogative to deviate from rules including
to alter rules; until then, and even otherwise, it is expected to adhere to
"express substantive stipulation" in rules framed under Art. 208 and
principle underlying therein, being procedure established by law - However
at same time, proceedings inside legislature cannot be called into question
on ground that same have not been carried on in accordance with rules of
business on the ground of "irregularity of procedure" (see in detail
Shortnotes A and B)
- Furthermore, held, rules framed under Art. 208 acquire status of
procedure established by law for purpose of Art. 21 of the Constitution
- Constitution of India - Art. 21 - "Procedure established by law" - Scope of
- Words and Phrases - "Procedure established by law"
D. Parliament and State Legislatures - Maharashtra Legislative
Assembly Rules, 1985 - R. 53 - Suspension of MLA - Conduct of Member
being
"grossly disorderly" - Meaning of expressions "grossly"
and
"disorderly" in R. 53 - Held, when conduct of Member is such that it is
impeding smooth or orderly functioning of House, and may also be of such a
nature that it is likely to bring disrepute to House, same would be "grossly
disorderly"
- Election - Political Parties, Politics and Government Formation
Suspension/Expulsion from House - Parliament and State Legislatures -
Suspension/Expulsion from House - Words and Phrases - "Grossly disorderly",
"grossly", "disorderly" - Constitution of India, Art. 208
E. Constitution of India - Art. 208 - Suspension of MLA - Whether
motion for, can be moved by any Member of House - Principles clarified
- Held, there is nothing in constitutional scheme or rules framed under Art. 208
to prevent a Member of House to move a motion for directing withdrawal of a
Member on ground of his grossly disorderly conduct - Further, if Speaker can suo
motu direct Member to withdraw from Assembly on same day instantly to secure
smooth functioning of proceedings, for same logic, even House could pass a
resolution itself on a motion being moved by a Member of House instantly with
concurrence of Speaker on such a motion
- Election - Political Parties, Politics and Government Formation
Suspension/Expulsion from House Parliament and State Legislatures -
Suspension/Expulsion from House - Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules,
1985, R. 53
F. Constitution of India - Art. 208 - Suspension of MLA - When can
Speaker exercise such power under the Rules concerned of the legislature -
Principles clarified
- In terms of R. 53 of the 1985 Rules, power is exercised by Speaker being a
quasi-judicial order directing Member to withdraw from meetings of Assembly -
Speaker is expected to exercise this power only in case of conduct of Member
being "grossly disorderly" and in a graded objective manner - Raison d'être is to
ensure that business of House on given day or ongoing Session, as the case may
be, can be carried on in an orderly manner and without any disruption owing to
misconduct of one or more Members - Expression used in R. 53 of the 1985 Rules
is
"grossly disorderly" - Action of suspension or directing withdrawal of a Member
from meetings of Assembly is in nature of self-security and is essentially directed to
ensure that House can then protect itself against obstruction, or disturbance of its
ongoing proceedings owing to misconduct of any of its Members - That power is
different from privilege to inflict punishment on a Member, which may require higher
degree of deprivation of Member over and above participating in proceedings of
House during Session
- Election - Political Parties, Politics and Government Formation
Suspension/Expulsion from House Parliament and State Legislatures
-
Suspension/Expulsion from House - Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules,
1985, R. 53
G. Constitution of India - Art. 14 - "Rational" and "proportional" -
Distinction between - Explained
- There is marked distinction between expression "rational" and "proportional"
- Expression "proportion" is derived from a Latin word "proportio" or
"proportionalis" - It means corresponding in size or amount to something else -
For instance, punishment should be proportional to crime - Whereas, expression
"rational" is derived from a Latin word "ratio" or "rationalis" - It means action is
based on or in accordance with reason or logic or so to say sensible or logical -
Rationality of action can be tested, both on ground of power inhering in legislature
and exercise of that power - Words and Phrases - "Rational" and "proportional"
Proceedings of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly (2019-2024) witnessed
heated exchanges between the members of the Opposition Party and the Ruling
Party due to an impression formed by the former that the business of the House
was being conducted in unilateral manner, with conscious and engineered effort to
suppress voice of the Opposition Party. In that, even the Leader of Opposition was
denied an opportunity to speak on a crucial motion under consideration. At the
relevant time, the House was presided over by the Chairman nominated under Rule
8 of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules, 1985 who according to the
petitioners, denied opportunity to the Opposition Party to speak including the
Leader of Opposition.
On the same day, the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs moved a resolution for
initiating action against 12 MLAs of the BJP (Opposition Party) for having committed
contempt of the House. That motion was tabled in the House and the Chairman
was called upon to do the needful. The Chairman then called upon the House to
pass the said resolution. The House in turn passed that resolution by majority votes
after it was put to vote.
It is contended that a motion for unruly behaviour in the House can never be a
subject matter of voting since it would enable the political party in power to virtually
wipe out the opposition for some trivial acts committed by their members, by
suspending as many members of the Opposition Party. The decision of suspension,
therefore, must rest with the Speaker and not the House. Notably, Rule 53 of the
Rules prescribes a maximum period of suspension not exceeding remainder of the
Sessions. Thus, suspension of the petitioners for a period of one year is grossly
unconstitutional and illegal. If the impugned resolution was allowed to prevail,
nothing would prevent the political party in power (in majority) to resort to such
mechanism and to suspend a large number of members of Opposition Party up to
five years or remainder of the term of the Legislative Assembly by resorting to
voting in the House.
(Para 13)
The issues for determination before the Supreme Court were:
(i) Whether suspension of MLAs by a resolution passed by Legislative
Assembly is open to judicial review?
(ii) Whether suspension of MLAs beyond period prescribed under the 1985
Rules for committing contempt of House can be said to be valid?
(iii) Whether legislature is bound to adhere to Rules framed under Article 208
of the Constitution and principle underlying therein?
(iv) What is the meaning of the expressions "grossly" and "disorderly" in Rule
53 of the 1985 Rules?
(v) Whether motion for suspension of MLA can be moved by any Member of
House?
(vi) When can Speaker of the House exercise power to suspend an MLA?
Held :
There is marked distinction between the expression "rational" and
"proportional". The expression "proportion" is derived from a Latin word "proportio"
or "proportionalis". It means corresponding in size or amount to something else. To
wit, the punishment should be proportional to the crime - whereas, expression
"rational" is derived from a Latin word "ratio" or "rationalis". It means action is
based on or in accordance with the reason or logic or so to say sensible or logical.
The rationality of action can be tested, both on the ground of power inhering in the
legislature and the exercise of that power.
(Para 33)
It is well settled that the Rules framed under Article 208 of the Constitution can
be altered by the House at any time. Until the rules are altered, however, the House
is ordinarily guided by the procedure prescribed in the Rules framed under Article
208 of the Constitution. At the same time, proceedings inside the legislature cannot
be called into question on the ground that the same have not been carried on in
accordance with the rules of business. Rules framed under Article 208 of the
Constitution acquire the status of procedure established by law for the purpose of
Article 21 of the Constitution.
(Paras 25 to 39)
Sharma V. Sri Krishna Sinha, AIR 1959 SC 395 (Five-Judge Bench); Raja Ram Pal
Privileges & Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964, AIR 1965 SC 745 (Seven-Judge Bench); Ratilal Bhanji Mithani V. Collector
of Customs, (1967) 3 SCR 926 : AIR 1967 SC 1639, followed
Bradlaugh V. Gossett, (1884) LR 12 QBD 271 : 50 LT 620, referred to
Viewed thus, even though the legislature has the prerogative to deviate from the
rules including to alter the rules; until then, and even otherwise, it is expected to
adhere to the "express substantive stipulation" (which is not mere procedure) in the
Rules framed under Article 208 of the Constitution and the principle underlying
therein, being procedure established by law.
(Paras 20.3 and 40)
(2007) 48 (4) GLR 2998 (Single-Judge Bench); Chhabildas Mehta V. Legislative
AIR 1973 Mad 371 (Full Bench); A.M. Paulraj V. T.N. Legislative Assembly, 1985
As aforesaid, the dispensation prescribed under the Rules to exercise power to
order withdrawal of Member (suspension) is ascribable to Rule 53 of the 1985
Rules.
(Para 41)
Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules not only speaks about the procedure to be adopted
for passing the drastic order of withdrawal of a Member from the House but also
about the substantive disciplinary or the rationality of the self-security measure to
be taken in a graded (objective standard) manner. The non-compliance of or
deviation from the former (procedure) may be non justiciable. However, in regard
to the substantive disciplinary or the rationality of the self-security measure inflicted
upon the erring Member, is open to judicial review on the touchstone of being
unconstitutional, grossly illegal and irrational or arbitrary.
(Para 42)
In terms of Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules, the power is exercised by the Speaker
being a quasi-judicial order directing the Member to withdraw from the meetings of
the Assembly. The Speaker is expected to exercise this power only in case of
conduct of the Member being "grossly disorderly" and in a graded objective
manner. The raison d'être is to ensure that the business of the House on the given
day or the ongoing Session, as the case may be, can be carried on in an orderly
manner and without any disruption owing to misconduct of one or more members.
The expression used in Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules is "grossly disorderly".
(Para 43)
The expression "grossly disorderly" has not been defined in the 1985 Rules.
(Para 44)
Black's Law Dictionary, 11th Edn., referred to
Taking the totality of the meaning of the expressions "grossly" and "disorderly",
it must follow that the conduct of the Member is such that it was impeding the
smooth or orderly functioning of the House, and may also be of such a nature that
it is likely to bring disrepute to the House. It may involve varied situations and,
therefore, implied exercise of rational corrective mechanism is quintessential. The
action of suspension or directing withdrawal of a Member from the meetings of the
Assembly is in the nature of self-security and is essentially directed to ensure that
the House can then protect itself against obstruction, or disturbance of its ongoing
proceedings owing to the misconduct of any of its members. That power is different
from the privilege to inflict punishment on a Member, which may require higher
degree of deprivation of the Member over and above participating in the
proceedings of the House during the Session. In a given case, it can be in the form
of expulsion being the highest degree of exclusion of the Member from the House.
(Para 46)
Concededly, there is nothing in the constitutional scheme or the Rules framed
under Article 208 of the Constitution to prevent a Member of the House to move a
motion for directing withdrawal of a Member on the ground of his grossly disorderly
conduct. Further, if the Speaker can suo motu direct the Member to withdraw from
the Assembly on the same day instantly to secure smooth functioning of the
proceedings, for the same logic, even the House could pass a resolution itself on a
motion being moved by a Member of the House instantly with the concurrence of
the Speaker on such a motion.
(Para 48)
If the resolution passed by the House was to provide for suspension beyond the
period prescribed under the Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules, it would be substantively
illegal, irrational and unconstitutional.
(Para 51)
Inflicting suspension for a period "beyond the period necessary" than to ensure
smooth working/functioning of the House during the Session "by itself"; and also,
as per the underlying objective standard specified in Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules,
indubitably, suffer from the vice of being grossly irrational measure adopted against
the erring Member and also substantively illegal and unconstitutional.
(Para 52)
In the present case, impugned resolution has been passed by the majority votes
in the House immediately after it was put to vote by the Chairman. It was in fact
introduced as a motion for initiating action for having committed contempt of the
House which ordinarily ought to have proceeded under Part XVIII of the 1985 Rules
dealing with Privileges. That would have required constitution of a Committee of
Privileges to enquire into the entire matter by giving opportunity of hearing to the
persons concerned. Instead of adopting that procedure, the House itself chose to
direct withdrawal of the petitioners from the meetings of the Assembly for a period
of one year - which direction is neither ascribable to the dispensation prescribed in
Part XVIII nor Rule 53 of the 1985 Rules enabling the Speaker to do so.
(Para 56)
It is not a case of procedural irregularity as such. Whereas, the decision taken by
the House in the present case, is one of substantive illegality in directing suspension
beyond the period of remainder of the Session in which the motion was presented.
This is so because, the period of suspension in excess of the period essential to do
so much less in a graded manner including on principle underlying Rule 53 of the
1985 Rules, would be antithesis to rational or objective standard approach for
ensuring orderly functioning of the House during the ongoing Session.
(Para 57)
The word "suspension" is necessarily linked to attendance of the Member in the
House. Thus, the suspension may be resorted to merely for ensuring orderly
conduct of the business of the House during the Session concerned. Anything in
excess of that would be irrational suspension. This is so because the Member
represents the constituency from where he has been duly elected and longer
suspension would entail in deprivation of the constituency to be represented in the
House.
(Paras 59 and 60)
1343 (Five-Judge Bench), relied on
Suspension for long period and beyond the Session has the effect of creating a
de facto vacancy though not a de jure vacancy.
(Para 60)
One-year suspension is worse than "expulsion", "disqualification" or "resignation"
- insofar as the right of the constituency to be represented before the
House/Assembly is concerned. In that, long suspension is bound to affect the rights
harsher than expulsion wherein a mid-term election is held within the specified time
in terms of Section 151-A of the 1951 Act, not later than six months. Thus, the
impugned resolution is unreasonable, irrational, and arbitrary and liable to be set
aside.
(Paras 19.9, 61 and 62)
OnLine Ori 57 : AIR 1973 Ori 111 (Division Bench); M.S.M. Sharma V. Sri Krishna
Sinha, AIR 1959 SC 395 (Five-Judge Bench); Powers, Privileges & Immunities of
State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 1964, AIR 1965 SC 745
:
Therefore, it is declared that the impugned resolution directing suspension of the
petitioners beyond the period of the remainder of the Monsoon Session concerned
held in July 2021 is non est in the eye of the law, nullity, unconstitutional,
substantively illegal and irrational. The impugned resolution is, thus, declared to be
ineffective in law, insofar as the period beyond the remainder of the stated Session
in which the resolution came to be passed.
(Paras 63 to 91)
Barton V. Taylor, (1886) LR 11 AC 197 (PC); Lawrence Joseph Harnett V. William
Patrick Crick, 1908 AC 470 : 78 LJPC 38 : 99 LT 601 (PC), relied on
AIR 1973 Ori 111 (Division Bench), impliedly approved
paras 4.19 to 4.30 : (2013) 6 CTC 506, paras 4.19 to 4.30 (Division Bench),
distinguished
8 : (2007) 48 (4) GLR 2998 (Single-Judge Bench); Chhabildas Mehta V.
729, paras 14 to 16 (Division Bench), held, per incuriam
Sinha, AIR 1959 SC 395, paras 25, 26, 28 and 29 (Five-Judge Bench); Sub-
Judge Bench); Edward Kielley V. William Carson, (1842) 4 Moo PC 63 : 13 ER
225; Thomas William Doyle V. George Charles Falconer, (1866) LR 1 PC 328 :
36 LJPC 33 : 15 WR 366, referred to
The Law, Privileges Proceedings and Usage of Parliament, Fifteenth (1950) Edn.
(See Chapter VII under the heading "Proceedings upon the naming of a Member"
at pp. 451-452.), referred to
As a result of the stated declaration, the petitioners are entitled for all
consequential benefits of being Members of the Legislative Assembly, on and after
the expiry of the period of the remainder of the Session concerned in July 2021.
The writ petitions are allowed in the above terms.
(Para 92)
RM-D/68819/S
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Mukul Rohatgi, Siddharth Bhatnagar, Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Mahesh
Jethmalani, Senior Advocates [Utsav Trivedi, Abhinay, Karan Dev
Chopra (Advocate-on-Record), Himanshu Sachdeva, Ms Manini Roy, Ms
Shivani Bhushan, Ms Unnati Vijay, Ms Aishwarya Samal, Pooran Chand
Roy, Milinda Sharma, Ms Arzoo Aneja, Ms Ira Mahajan, Ms Astha Prasad
(Advocate-on-Record), Ravi Sharma, Ms Mugdha Pande, Ajit Wagh and
Abhikalp Pratap Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the
Petitioners;
C. Aryama Sundaram, Senior Advocate [Rahul Chitnis, Sachin Patil
(Advocate-on-Record), Akshay Shinde, Aaditya A. Pande, Geo Joseph,
Ms Shwetal Shepal, Ms Rohini Musa, Zafar Inayat, Abhishek Gupta and
Ajit Kadethankar (for State Election Commission), Advocates], for the
Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Maharashtra Legislative Assembly
285f
284c-d, 284f-g, 286b,
T.N. Legislative Assembly
290a
V.C. Chandhira Kumar V. T.N. Legislative
Assembly
292a, 318c
Amarinder Singh V. Punjab Vidhan Sabha
308a-b
286a-b, 290c-d, 292a-b,
293a-b, 293e, 297f,
298b, 299d-e, 299e-f,
302f, 306d-e, 309b-c,
312c-d, 318b
2998, Jagdishbhai Thakore V. Chandrikaben
Chudasma (held, per incuriam)
291g-h, 318a
290c-d
292a-b
Zachillhu
292a-b, 302e
Accountability V. Union of India
296f-g, 297c, 302a, 317f
Secy., T.N. Legislative Assembly
292a
A.M. Paulraj V. T.N. Legislative Assembly
292a
India
298b
Narain
296b-c
K.A. Mathialagan V. P. Srinivasan
292a
Sushanta Kumar Chand V. Orissa Legislative
Assembly
290c, 316b, 316d-e
Chhabildas Mehta V. Legislative Assembly,
Gujarat State (held, per incuriam)
292a, 318a
18. (1967) 3 SCR 926 : AIR 1967 SC 1639, Ratilal
Bhanji Mithani V. Collector of Customs
301b-c
19. AIR 1965 SC 745, Powers, Privileges &
Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special 290c, 292a, 299a, 301f,
Reference No. 1 of 1964
301g
20. AIR 1959 SC 395, M.S.M. Sharma V. Sri Krishna290c, 300d, 301c, 302e-f,
Sinha
318a-b
21. 1908 AC 470 : 78 LJPC 38 : 99 LT 601 (PC),310e-f, 311a, 311b, 311g,
Lawrence Joseph Harnett V. William Patrick Crick
314c-d
22. (1886) LR 11 AC 197 (PC), Barton V. Taylor
290c, 309c, 309d, 310d-e,
311g, 312b, 312c-d,
312e-f, 313a, 313d,
313f, 313g-h, 314a,
314a
23. (1884) LR 12 QBD 271 : 50 LT 620, Bradlaugh V.
Gossett
297b-c, 297c
24. (1866) LR 1 PC 328 : 36 LJPC 33 : 15 WR 366,
Thomas William Doyle V. George Charles
Falconer
309d, 312c, 312g
25. (1842) 4 Moo PC 63 : 13 ER 225, Edward Kielley
V. William Carson
309d, 312c
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
A.M. KHANWILKAR, J.- The petitioners have been duly elected as
members of the current Maharashtra Legislative Assembly (2019-
2024). They got elected from different constituencies in the State of
Maharashtra. They belong to the Bharatiya Janata Party (for short
"BJP"), the principal Opposition Party in the Maharashtra Legislative
Assembly. The Ruling Party is a coalition between the Shiv Sena, the
Nationalist Congress Party ("NCP") and the Indian National Congress
("INC") christened as "Maha Vikas Aghadi".
2. This lis emanates from the events as unfolded during the Monsoon
Session of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly on 5-7-2021. The
proceedings of the House witnessed heated exchanges between the
members of the Opposition Party and the Ruling Party due to an
impression formed by the former that the business of the House was
being conducted in unilateral manner, with conscious and engineered
effort to suppress voice of the Opposition Party. In that, even the
Leader of Opposition was denied an opportunity to speak on a crucial
motion under consideration. At the relevant time, the House was
presided over by the Chairman nominated under Rule 8 of the
Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules (for short "the Rules"), who
according to the petitioners, denied opportunity to the Opposition Party
to speak including to the Leader of Opposition.
3. It is alleged that in the meeting of the Business Advisory
Committee, which preceded the actual Assembly Session, there was a
concerted effort on behalf of the members of the Ruling Party to cut
short the Assembly Session for a period of two days especially when the
State was facing unprecedented situation owing to pandemic, which
needed elaborate deliberation in the House. The concerted effort was to
strip of all legislative tools available to the Opposition Party so as to
make sure that voice of opposition is muffled and suppressed.
4. The Chair of the Speaker of the House was vacant at the relevant
time due to stepping down by the incumbent. The election for
appointing a new Speaker of the Assembly was yet to be conducted. As
per Rule 8 of the Rules, in such a situation other nominated Member of
the House had to preside on 5-7-2021. As aforesaid, a general feeling
had developed amongst the members of the Opposition Party that the
business of the House was not being transacted in congenial manner
and they were prevented from raising important questions and express
their views on matters of public importance. To wit, when the Minister
was moving a resolution in relation to the empirical data pertaining to
OBC, the Leader of Opposition wanted to object to the same. However,
he was denied that opportunity. That eventually led to heated
exchanges between the members of both sides and consequently, the
House was adjourned.
5. Thereafter, some of the members of the Opposition went to meet
the Deputy Speaker in his chamber to vent out their grievance
regarding the unfair manner of conducting proceedings by the
nominated Chairman. At that time, some members of the Ruling Party
(Shiv Sena) arrived and engaged in heated exchanges. When the House
resumed, the nominated Chairman referred to the fact that some
members of the Shiv Sena were present in the chamber and involved in
heated exchanges, but no action was being taken against them as both
the sections had apologised to each other. According to the petitioners,
when the House resumed, by way of courtesy a sincere apology was
graciously tendered by the Leader of Opposition to the Chairman for the
earlier incident while adverting to the fact that none of the MLAs
belonging to the Opposition Party (BJP) including the petitioners herein
had abused the Chairman.
6. Soon thereafter, to the utter surprise of the petitioners (and other
members of the Opposition Parties), the Minister for Parliamentary
Affairs moved a resolution for initiating action against 12 MLAs of the
BJP for having committed contempt of the House. That motion was
tabled in the House and the Chairman was called upon to do the
needful. The Chairman then called upon the House to pass the said
resolution. The House in turn passed that resolution by majority votes
after it was put to vote at 1440 hours on 5-7-2021. The same reads
thus:
"P.H. : Contempt of the House by objectionable behaviour.
M.H. : Resolution of Minister for Parliamentary Affairs regarding
suspension of MLAs for Contempt of the House due to objectionable
behaviour.
(1) Dr Sanjay Kute,
(2) Adv. Ashish Shelar,
(3) Shri Abhimanyu Pawar,
(4) Shri Girish Mahajan,
(5) Shri Atul Bhatkhalkar,
(6) Adv. Parag Alavani,
(7) Shri Harish Pimple,
(8) Shri Ram Satpute,
(9) Shri Jaikumar Rawal,
(10) Shri Yogesh Sagar,
(11) Shri Narayan Kuche,
(12) Shri Kritikumar alias Bunty Bhangdiya, MLA.
Adv. Anil Parab (Minister for Parliamentary Affairs) : Hon'ble
Speaker, I wish to move the following resolution with your kind
permission.
'On 5-7-2021 when the business of the House was being
conducted, Hon'ble MLAs Dr Sanjay Kute, Adv. Ashish Shelar,
Sarvashree Abhimanyu Pawar, Girish Mahajan, Atul Bhatkhalkar,
Adv. Parag Alvani, Sarvashree Harish Pimple, Ram Satpute,
Jaikumar Rawal, Yogesh Sagar, Narayan Kuche, Kirtikumar alias
Bunty Bhangdia misbehaved in the House, addressed the
Chairman in the Speaker's Chair unparliamentary language, tried
to take the mike and Rajdand, despite repeated warnings, all
these members misbehaved in the chamber of the Hon'ble
Speaker even after the House was adjourned and abused and
manhandled the Chairman in the Speaker's Chair. Due to the
undisciplined and unbecoming behaviour resulting in maligning
the dignity of the House, this House resolves to suspend the
membership of Sarvashree Dr Sanjay Kute, Adv. Ashish Shelar,
Sarvashree Abhimanyu Pawar, Girish Mahajan, Atul Bhatkhalkar,
Adv. Parag Alvani, Sarvashree Harish Pimple, Ram Satpute,
Jaikumar Rawal, Yogesh Sagar, Narayan Kuche, Kirtikumar alias
Bunty Bhangdia for a period of one year. Similarly, during the
period of suspension they may be restrained from entering into
the premises of Vidhan Bhawan at Mumbai and Nagpur.'
Hon'ble Speaker, I request the House to pass this resolution.
Resolution has been tabled.
Chairman in the Speaker's Chair : Now I put this resolution to
vote.
Resolution has been passed after putting it to vote."
7. According to the petitioners, the Leader of Opposition thereafter
wrote four letters to the Deputy Speaker on 7-7-2021 for furnishing
relevant information including CCTV footage, videorecording of the
entire proceedings
and a copy of the verbatim proceedings of the record of the Legislative
Assembly dated 5-7-2021 and 6-7-2021. Thereafter, the petitioners
also sent letters to the Deputy Speaker requesting him to furnish
relevant material of the proceedings including recording of the
proceedings in the House dated 5-7-2021 and 6-7-2021.
8. Eventually, on 22-7-2021, the petitioners approached this Court
by way of these writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution of
India, for issuing appropriate writ, order or direction so as to quash and
set aside the impugned Resolution dated 5-7-2021 passed by the
Maharashtra Legislative Assembly being unconstitutional and grossly
illegal and for enforcement of their fundamental rights as guaranteed
under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
9. It is urged that the impugned Resolution dated 5-7-2021 has
been passed in undue haste and is politically motivated. It is primarily
intended to adversely impact the numbers of the Opposition Party in
the House. It has been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing
to the petitioners much less calling upon them to offer written
explanation. To buttress this ground, reliance has been placed on a
decision of the two-Judge Bench of this Court in Alagaapuram R.
Mohanraj V. T.N. Legislative Assembly1.
10. It is urged that the events, as unfolded, on the face of it, would
indicate the undue haste in which the impugned resolution came to be
passed within a matter of hours, that too, without granting opportunity
to the petitioners to meet the case against them. This was grossly and
patently violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. For, there was
absolutely no material before the Chairman or the Minister to
substantiate the need for suspending the petitioners, that too for such
a long period.
11. Further, even the impugned Resolution dated 5-7-2021 does not
refer to any material on the basis of which such extreme step of
suspension had been taken against these petitioners. There is no
indication in the resolution as to how the 12 members (petitioners
herein) were identified from a huge crowd of people and singled out for
initiating the action of suspension. As a matter of fact, the impugned
resolution itself alludes to unruly behaviour on the floor of the House
and outside the chamber of the Speaker. The video footage of the
alleged incident, which is in public domain, shows a large crowd of
people and there is absolutely no way of identifying the 12 MLAs
(petitioners herein) who have been suspended and singled out. As a
matter of fact, the Minister who brought the motion was not even
present in the chamber of the Speaker. In a similar situation, this Court
in
Alagaapuram R. Mohanraj1 had to quash the resolution for lack of
evidence to identify the suspended members of the Tamil Nadu
Legislative Assembly.
12. In the present case, the impugned resolution makes no
reference to any material much less video footage, etc. which has been
relied upon before bringing an action for suspension. Moreover, it is
amply clear from the impugned resolution that the action against the
petitioners was for alleged unruly behaviour/misconduct and not for
breach of privilege that is covered by an independent dispensation. As
regards suspension of a Member of the
House, as per Rule 53 of the Rules such action could be initiated "only"
by the Speaker after complying with the principles of natural justice
and fair play. The provision, such as Rule 53, is engrafted to put a
check on the majoritarian attitude of the Government. The Speaker is
expected to act fairly, in particular during the conduct of proceedings in
the House towards both sides, namely, members of the Ruling Party as
well as of the Opposition Party. So to speak, he exercises quasi-judicial
function.
13. It is urged that a motion for unruly behaviour in the House can
never be a subject-matter of voting since it would enable the political
party in power to virtually wipe out the opposition for some trivial acts
committed by their members, by suspending as many members of the
Opposition Party. The decision of suspension, therefore, must rest with
the Speaker and not the House. Notably, Rule 53 of the Rules
prescribes a maximum period of suspension not exceeding remainder of
the Sessions. Thus, suspension of the petitioners for a period of one
year is grossly unconstitutional and illegal. If the impugned resolution
was allowed to prevail, nothing would prevent the political party in
power (in majority) to resort to such mechanism and to suspend a large
number of members of Opposition Party up to five years or remainder of
the term of the Legislative Assembly by resorting to voting in the
House.
14. It is also urged that the erstwhile Speaker had stepped down, as
a result of which, he ceased to be the Chairman. As such, heated
exchanges allegedly occurring between him and the petitioners outside
the House, would not invite action of suspension, inasmuch as after
stepping down as Speaker, he would continue only as an ordinary MLA.
Further, the Chairman nominated under Rule 8 of the Rules is not
empowered to exercise powers under Rule 53, considering the fact that
there was a Deputy Speaker of the House who could have discharged
the functions of the Speaker after his stepping down or during his
absence as per Article 180 of the Constitution. In that sense, the
impugned Resolution dated 5-7-2021 is nullity and non est in the eye
of the law, having passed without authority of law.
15. These writ petitions came up for preliminary hearing on 14-12-
2021. After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioners and for the
State of Maharashtra, the Court passed the following order2 : (Ashish
"1. We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and for the
State of Maharashtra.
2. These matters involve issues of moment for a Westminster
form of Democracy.
3. It is urged by the petitioners that the impugned resolution by
the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly dated 5-7-2021 suffers from
the vice of denial of opportunity of being heard and adherence to the
rules of natural justice.
4. It is also urged that the resolution neither follows the
procedure prescribed under Rule 53 of the Maharashtra Legislative
Assembly Rules (for short "the Rules"), namely, for suspension of
Member of the House by
the Speaker nor predicated in Part XVIII including Rule 273 to take
action against the Member for breach of privilege of the House.
5. It is also urged that the power of Legislative Assembly though
absolute in certain respects, the decision reached by the House can
always be questioned on the settled principles amongst others being
manifestly grossly arbitrary or irrational, violating the fundamental
rights and such other grounds, as may be permissible and delineated
in the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Raja Ram
Pal V. Lok Sabha³, including the two Judge decision of this Case in
Alagaapuram R. Mohanraj V. T.N. Legislative Assembly1. Further, for
the nature of impugned resolution, it not only abridges the rights of
as many as twelve members, as guaranteed to them under Article
194 of the Constitution of India, but also of the constituencies
represented by each of them by merely invoking the route of
majority opinion of the House, an unprecedented and unconventional
move not backed by any similar precedent. In any case, the period
of suspension of one year is unconscionable and manifestly arbitrary
and irrational.
6. On the other hand, it is urged by the learned counsel for the
State that Article 212(1) of the Constitution of India makes it amply
clear that it is not open to the Court to explore the argument of
proper procedure not followed by the House. Further, it is not open
to the Court to do judicial review of the final decision on the basis of
abstract arguments and grounds urged before this Court; and even if
a sui generis procedure has been adopted by the House, it is the
absolute prerogative of the House to regulate its business.
7. It is also urged by the learned counsel for the State that the
petitioners have not refuted the case made out against them about
misbehaviour in the House and outside the House as well. Indeed,
this plea has been countered by learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners.
8. All these are debatable issues and would require deeper
consideration.
9. As a result, we deem it appropriate to issue a formal notice to
the respondents, returnable on 11-1-2022.
10. Mr Sachin Patil, Advocate waives notice for Respondent 2
State.
11. Additionally, the petitioner is permitted to serve dasti notice
on Respondent 1.
12. Needless to observe that pendency of these petitions will not
come in the way of the petitioners to explore the possibility of urging
upon the House to show leniency and reconsider the decision
impugned in these writ petitions, at least, to the extent of reducing
the term specified therein. That is a matter to be considered by the
House appropriately."
By this order, the Court had expressed a sanguine hope that the matter
would get resolved in the ensuing Session scheduled in the following
week. Presumably, no effective headway had been made in that regard.
16. It appears that notice sent to Respondent 1, as per office report,
has been duly served. We have been informed by the learned counsel
appearing for the
State as well as the petitioners that Respondent 1 would not be
appearing in the present proceedings. The respondent State, however,
is defending the impugned resolution by filing counter-affidavit dated 7
-1-2022 sworn by Mr Satish Baban Waghole, In Charge Secretary,
Parliamentary Affairs Department. The reply-affidavit amongst others
points out that the issues raised by the petitioners are essentially the
matters concerning procedure in the House of the Legislative Assembly
and at best regarding some procedural irregularities committed during
the proceedings. That cannot be the basis to invoke jurisdiction of this
Court which is constricted by the mandate of Article 212 of the
Constitution, as it concerns the powers and privileges of the House.
Thus, the petitioners are not entitled for any relief under Article 32 of
the Constitution.
17. It is urged that the suspension for unruly conduct in the House
is not solely referrable to Rule 53 of the Rules. Whereas, it is open to
the legislature to depart from the Rules and take a decision which could
exceed the period prescribed in the Rules. The period of one year
suspension cannot be said to be arbitrary or disproportionate as such
when the legislature has the prerogative to reprimand or admonish its
members, independent of the power of the Speaker of the House to
order withdrawal of members under the Rules. The House has the
power to take suitable action against its members who transgress the
limits laid down in Article 194(1) of the Constitution, being its inherent
power and it is not open to the judicature to have a second-guess
approach in that regard.
18. It is urged that from the averments in the writ petitions itself, it
is conceded that the Leader of Opposition had to apologise for the
unruly behaviour of the members of the Opposition including that of the
petitioners. The petitioners had committed acts which resulted in
undermining and maligning the dignity of the House in the face of the
House and for which reason, the House decided to suspend the
petitioners. In such a situation, there is no question of granting any
opportunity of hearing or for furnishing written explanation, being a
case of contempt of the House on the face of it while it was in Session.
The reply-affidavit essentially rebuts the legal arguments of the
petitioners and reiterates the factual position emanating from the
impugned resolution itself and urges this Court to dismiss the writ
petitions being devoid of merits.
Submissions - Petitioners
19. The petitioners are represented by Mr Mahesh Jethmalani, Mr
Mukul Rohatgi, Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Mr Siddharth Bhatnagar,
learned Senior Counsel. The sum and substance of their submission is
as follows:
19.1. First, the impugned resolution passed by the House is without
jurisdiction. For, the power to suspend as per applicable Rules is
bestowed "only" upon the Speaker of the House and as the Office of the
Speaker was vacant at the relevant time, upon the Deputy Speaker as
per Article 180 of the Constitution. Further, the exercise of power by
the Speaker is a quasi-judicial decision which must, therefore, precede
with a formal inquiry, opportunity of hearing to the Member concerned
and recording of satisfaction about the nature of misdeeds committed
by the Member concerned amounting to grossly
disorderly conduct. In short, the House had no jurisdiction to pass the
impugned resolution much less the manner in which it has been
passed, in undue haste.
19.2. Second, no known or prescribed procedure has been followed
to order withdrawal of the members from the Assembly. Thus, a gross
illegality has been committed by the House. The House is bound to
adhere to the Rules framed by it for that purpose under Article 208 of
the Constitution. The applicable Rules provide for different
dispensation. The power to order withdrawal of its Member, is provided
in Rule 53 and regarding breach of its privileges is governed by Part
XVIII of the Rules (vide Rules 273 to 289). A 15 days' notice regarding
the motion introduced in the House is required to be given under Part
XII of the Rules being Rule 106 of the Rules. None of these have been
followed in tabling of the subject motion and in passing the impugned
resolution. Thus, it is not a case of mere procedural irregularity, but of
being unconstitutional, grossly illegal and irrational resolution adopted
by the House including the direction to the petitioners to withdraw from
the House for one year vide the impugned resolution.
19.3. Thirdly, there has been gross violation of principles of natural
justice. In that, no opportunity whatsoever was afforded to the
petitioners much less a formal notice calling upon them to offer their
explanation. Had such an opportunity been given, it would have been
possible for the petitioners to demonstrate that they were not part of
the unruly mob which had indulged in activities amounting to grossly
disorderly conduct.
19.4. It is also urged that at any rate the impugned resolution
suspending the petitioners for a period of one year cannot be
countenanced in law being unconstitutional, grossly illegal and
irrational. Inasmuch as, Rule 53 provides for a graded approach to be
adopted by the Speaker for ensuring orderly conduct of business in the
House by directing withdrawal of a Member, who in his opinion, had or
was creating obstruction in that regard. Inasmuch as, if it is his first
instance of such type, the Speaker could order his withdrawal for the
remainder of the day's meeting. In case of repeat misconduct during
the same Session, the Speaker could order withdrawal of such Member
for the remainder of the Session. Had it been a case of exercise of
power under Rule 53, the Member so directed to be absent shall, during
the period of such absence, is deemed to be absent with the permission
of the Assembly within the meaning of clause (4) of Article 190 of the
Constitution. However, the impugned resolution makes no reference to
this aspect at all.
19.5. On the stated position taken by the respondents that the
power has been exercised by the House and is not ascribable to Rule
53, but the inherent power of the House, even in that case, the
suspension of the Member of the House cannot go beyond the ongoing
Session. Inasmuch as, excess and unnecessary period of suspension of
the Member from the House is not only undesirable in the matter of
democratic values enunciated in the Constitution, but substantively or
grossly illegal and irrational, if not bordering on perversity. For, longer
period of suspension beyond the ongoing Session would not only be
unnecessary, but nearer to being arbitrary, irrational and perverse.
Taking any other view would entail in validating grossly illegal and
irrational resolution of the House. To buttress this argument, support is
drawn additionally from the dispensation predicated in the Standing
Order concerned of the United
Kingdom regarding the parliamentary procedure as well as extracts
from Sir Thomas Erskine May's Treatise on The Law, Privileges
Proceedings and Usage of Parliament.
19.6. It is urged that the consequence of absence of suspended
Member of the House beyond sixty days would entail in vacation of the
seat occupied by him/her, as predicated in Article 190(4); and in which
case, in law, the constitutional authority concerned would be obliged to
initiate process to fill in the vacant seat(s) not later than six months
from the date of such vacancy in terms of Section 151-A4 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (for short "the 1951 Act"). This
is essential also to ensure that the constituency concerned does not
remain unrepresented in the Legislative Assembly for more than six
months owing to the action against its duly elected representative by
the House. Had it been a case of expulsion, it would not have resulted
in punishment either to the Member concerned or the constituency
represented by him. For, the Member concerned in that case could get
re-elected to occupy the vacant seat not later than six months.
19.7. Thus understood, the timeline of suspension of the petitioners
prescribed in the impugned resolution is worst and operates as
inflicting penalty upon the petitioners as well as the constituency
represented by them. In other words, it is worse than expulsion of a
Member of the House.
19.8. In the present case, the learned counsel contends that the
House had to assemble for only two days of the ongoing Session. The
suspension, therefore, ideally could not have been for a period more
than the remainder of the Session in terms of Rule 53 of the Rules.
Moreover, as the motion was introduced in the House for initiating
contempt, it ought to have proceeded only under Part XVIII of the
Rules by following the procedure prescribed therein which includes
giving opportunity of hearing to the Member before the Committee of
Privileges. If it was to be regarded as an ordinary motion, then the
procedure under Rule 106 of the Rules would have required 15 clear
days' notice. Further, Rule 110 postulates that the resolution if moved
by the
Minister, it should precede with seven days' notice. Even this
requirement had been violated. In either case, the impugned resolution
suffers from the vice of denial of principles of natural justice, besides
being arbitrary, perfunctory and founded on unsubstantiated allegations
against the petitioners. To buttress this submission, reliance has been
placed on the dictum in Alagaapuram R. Mohanraj1.
19.9. It is then urged that at any rate the time period of suspension
as specified in the impugned resolution is manifestly arbitrary and
grossly disproportionate and excessive, besides being grossly illegal
and unconstitutional being hit by Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
For, the impugned resolution entails in denial of representation even to
the constituency concerned for such a long time, much less beyond the
period specified in the Constitution [Article 190(4)] and the mandate of
conducting elections not later than six months from the date of vacancy
vide Sections 150 and 151-A of the 1951 Act. Reliance is placed on
Barton V. Taylor6, Sushanta Kumar Chand V. Orissa Legislative
Assembly ², M.S.M. Sharma V. Sri Krishna Sinha Powers, Privileges &
Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964°, Jagjit Singh V. State of Haryana , Raja Ram Pal V. Lok Sabha³
and Amarinder Singh V. Punjab Vidhan Sabha ¹ 1.
19.10. It was also argued that suspension of members beyond the
period specified in Rule 53 tantamounts to deviation from the logic
stated therein. And being a case of deviation from the applicable Rules,
it was essential to first suspend Rule 53. That could be done by way of
a motion under Rule 5712 Moreover, the general powers of the Speaker
have been constricted in terms of Rule 5813 namely, limited to matters
not specifically provided for in the rules.
Submissions - Respondent (State of Maharashtra)
20. Mr C. Aryama Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the State of Maharashtra, however, would urge that much argument of
the petitioners is founded on untenable assumption that the Rules were
binding on the House; and it was not open to the House to proceed
dehors the rules
formulated under Article 208 of the Constitution. He submits that it is
open to the legislature to deviate from the Rules, even if framed under
Article 208. Such rules are only akin to the bye-laws of the society
which are not enforceable nor can it be regarded as statutory rules.
Further, grounds of challenge set forth by the petitioners are essentially
questioning the procedure adopted by the House in adopting the
impugned resolution. Such a challenge cannot be maintained nor could
be entertained by the Court in light of bar under Article 212(1) in
particular. It is not open to the Court to question the decision of the
House on the ground of irregularities in the procedure. For, the House
has the prerogative to adopt its own procedure even dehors the Rules
framed under Article 208. In a given situation, the rules being
procedural rules can be deviated by the House, if the need so arises.
The Court can only enquire into the question as to whether the House
had jurisdiction to adopt such a resolution and no further.
20.1. He further submits that it is cardinal that the powers and
privileges of the House of Legislatures as delineated in Article 194 of
the Constitution are non-justiciable, forming part of Chapter III (the
State Legislature) in Part VI of the Constitution. It is so mandated by
Article 212(1) of the Constitution. That gives enough room to the
legislature to adopt its own procedure for upholding the privileges of
the House of legislature and its members which includes proceeding
against even non-member in case of breach. Thus, it is not open to
even remotely suggest that the legislature lacks jurisdiction.
20.2. He submits that the fact that Rule 53 of the Rules provides for
exercise of power by the Speaker to order withdrawal of Member in
graded manner, that does not and cannot prevent the House from
passing a resolution to even expel the erring Member. Thus, the House
can certainly direct suspension of its Member for a period beyond the
remainder term of the Session. The legislature while adopting such
resolution is not required to give any reason. For, no judicial review of
reasons which had weighed with the legislature to pass the resolution is
permissible, unless it is further shown that the resolution adopted by
the House is unconstitutional. In the present case, the House had
adopted resolution which is self-eloquent. In that, it mentions the
necessity for passing such a resolution of suspension of the petitioners
for a term of one year. The power has been exercised by the legislature,
which is inherent in it especially regarding the conduct of its business.
The impugned resolution, therefore, is not unconstitutional. He would
submit that in the guise of asserting that the impugned resolution is
irrational, the petitioners in effect are questioning the proportionality of
the period of suspension. This enquiry by the Court is impermissible.
For, the decision of the House regarding quantum or the period of
suspension is non-justiciable.
20.3. He vehemently urged that this Court ought not to venture into
the factual matrix and have a second-guess approach regarding the
opinion expressed by the House in the impugned resolution. To buttress
his submissions, he has placed reliance on the decision of the Gujarat
High Court in Jagdishbhai Thakore V. Chandrikaben Chudasma¹4 , which
follows the exposition of the Division Bench of the same High Court in
Chhabildas Mehta V. Legislative Assembly, Gujarat State15. He has also
placed reliance on K.A. Mathialagan V. P. Srinivasan16, A.M. Paulraj V.
T.N. Legislative Assembly17, K. Anbazhagan V. Secy., T.N. Legislative
Assembly18, V.C. Chandhira Kumar V. T.N. Legislative Assembly19,
Powers. Privileges & Immunities of State Legislatures. In re. Special
Reference No. 1 of 1964° Kihoto Hollohan V. Zachillhu²0, , M.C. Mehta V.
Union of India²1 Raja Ram Pal³ and Amarinder Singh11.
21. Mr Sundaram would further submit that the Maharashtra
Legislative Assembly even in the past on more than one occasion had
passed similar resolution to suspend its Member for one year period.
That is the legitimate inherent power of the House in the matter of
upholding its privilege. Article 190(3) prescribes no limitation in this
regard.
21.1. Further, the invocation of Article 190(4) and Section 151-A of
the 1951 Act by the petitioners, is completely misplaced. For, Article
190(4) has no application unless the absence of the Member concerned
is voluntary and without permission of the House. Article 190(4) cannot
override the powers and privileges of the legislature endowed in Article
190(3). Article 190(4) is an enabling provision envisaging occurrence of
vacancy only if the legislature so resolves/decides, unlike ipso facto
vacancy occurring in situations referred to in Articles 190(1) to 190(3).
21.2. For issuing declaration under Article 190(4) that vacancy has
arisen, it ought to be done by the legislature if such recommendation is
made by the Committee constituted under Rule 229 of the Rules known
as Committee on Absence of Members from the Sittings of the House.
The functions of the stated Committee are spelt out in Rule 230. The
procedure noted in Rules 231 and 232 is clearly indicative of the fact
that the absence of the Member must be voluntary and without
permission of the House. In fact, the period of absence noted in Article
190(4) is sixty days22 of meetings and not English calendar days. In
this case, only seven days of meetings had been conducted so far.
Thus, invocation of Article 190(4) in the fact situation of the present
case is unavailable.
21.3. Further, in the case of absence of Member from the House
owing to his/her suspension by the House presupposes that the House
itself has restricted
the entry of the Member concerned during the meetings and it can be
safely regarded as deemed permission of the House for absence for the
relevant period. Similarly, the constituency cannot complain about its
(non-representation in the House having elected someone who conducts
himself/herself inappropriately in the meetings.
21.4. In Raja Ram Pal³, similar plea had been negatived.
Concededly, suspended elected representative continues to represent
the constituency from where he/she has been elected for all other
purposes except attending the meetings owing to suspension. The
argument of the petitioners is more fixed on the basis of morality
approach. That cannot be countenanced. As a matter of law, the House
has inherent powers to direct suspension of its Member for one year
period and there is no express bar or restriction provided for by the
Constitution or by virtue of any statutory provision. In substance, it is
urged that the Court cannot enquire into the grievances as made,
essentially being about the irregularity of procedure in adopting the
impugned resolution by the House.
22. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and the
respondent State. As aforesaid, Respondent 1 has chosen not to appear
despite service.
Consideration
23. The moot question is about the maintainability of the challenge
in respect of the stated resolution adopted by the Legislative Assembly.
24. The scope of interference by the Court has been well delineated
in successive decisions of the Constitution Bench of this Court. This
Court has consistently expounded that the judicial scrutiny regarding
exercise of legislative privileges (including power to punish for
contempt of the House) is constricted and cannot be stricto sensu on
the touchstone of judicial review as generally understood in other
situations. In that, there is complete immunity from judicial review in
matters of irregularity of procedure.
25. The Constitution Bench of this Court in Raja Ram Pal³ delineated
the principles on the basis of a catena of decisions noted in the said
"Summary of the principles relating to parameters of judicial review in relation to
exercise of parliamentary provisions:
431. We may summarise the principles that can be culled out
from the above discussion. They are:
(a) Parliament is a coordinate organ and its views do deserve
deference even while its acts are amenable to judicial scrutiny;
(b) The constitutional system of government abhors absolutism
and it being the cardinal principle of our Constitution that no one,
howsoever lofty, can claim to be the sole judge of the power given
under the Constitution, mere coordinate constitutional status, or
even the status of an exalted constitutional functionaries, does
not disentitle this Court from exercising its jurisdiction of judicial
review of actions which partake the character of judicial or quasi-
judicial decision;
(c) The expediency and necessity of exercise of power or
privilege by the legislature are for the determination of the
legislative authority and not for determination by the courts;
(d) The judicial review of the manner of exercise of power of
contempt or privilege does not mean the said jurisdiction is being
usurped by the judicature;
(e) Having regard to the importance of the functions
discharged by the legislature under the Constitution and the
majesty and grandeur of its task, there would always be an initial
presumption that the powers, privileges, etc. have been regularly
and reasonably exercised, not violating the law or the
constitutional provisions, this presumption being a rebuttable
one;
(f) The fact that Parliament is an august body of coordinate
constitutional position does not mean that there can be no
judicially manageable standards to review exercise of its power;
(g) While the area of powers, privileges and immunities of the
legislature being exceptional and extraordinary its acts,
particularly relating to exercise thereof, ought not to be tested on
the traditional parameters of judicial review in the same manner
as an ordinary administrative action would be tested, and the
Court would confine itself to the acknowledged parameters of
judicial review and within the judicially discoverable and
manageable standards, there is no foundation to the plea that a
legislative body cannot be attributed jurisdictional error;
(h) The judicature is not prevented from scrutinising the
validity of the action of the legislature trespassing on the
fundamental rights conferred on the citizens;
(i) The broad contention that the exercise of privileges by
legislatures cannot be decided against the touchstone of
fundamental rights or the constitutional provisions is not correct;
(j) If a citizen, whether a non-Member or a Member of the
legislature, complains that his fundamental rights under Article 20
or 21 had been contravened, it is the duty of this Court to
examine the merits of the said contention, especially when the
impugned action entails civil consequences;
(k) There is no basis to the claim of bar of exclusive cognizance
or absolute immunity to the parliamentary proceedings in Article
105(3) of the Constitution;
(1) The manner of enforcement of privilege by the legislature
can result in judicial scrutiny, though subject to the restrictions
contained in the other constitutional provisions, for example
Article 122 or 212;
(m) Article 122(1) and Article 212(1) displace the broad
doctrine of exclusive cognizance of the legislature in England of
exclusive cognizance of internal proceedings of the House
rendering irrelevant the case-law that emanated from courts in
that jurisdiction; inasmuch
as the same has no application to the system of governance provided
by the Constitution of India;
(n) Article 122(1) and Article 212(1) prohibit the validity of
any proceedings in legislature from being called in question in a
court merely on the ground of irregularity of procedure;
(o) The truth or correctness of the material will not be
questioned by the court nor will it go into the adequacy of the
material or substitute its opinion for that of the legislature;
(p) Ordinarily, the legislature, as a body, cannot be accused of
having acted for an extraneous purpose or being actuated by
caprice or mala fide intention, and the court will not lightly
presume abuse or misuse, giving allowance for the fact that the
legislature is the best judge of such matters, but if in a given
case, the allegations to such effect are made, the court may
examine the validity of the said contention, the onus on the
person alleging being extremely heavy;
(q) The rules which the legislature has to make for regulating
its procedure and the conduct of its business have to be subject
to the provisions of the Constitution;
(r) Mere availability of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business, as made by the legislature in exercise of enabling
powers under the Constitution, is never a guarantee that they
have been duly followed;
(s) The proceedings which may be tainted on account of
substantive or gross illegality or unconstitutionality are not
protected from judicial scrutiny;
(t) Even if some of the material on which the action is taken is
found to be irrelevant, the court would still not interfere so long as
there is some relevant material sustaining the action:
(u) An ouster clause attaching finality to a determination does
ordinarily oust the power of the court to review the decision but
not on grounds of lack of jurisdiction or it being a nullity for some
reason such as gross illegality, irrationality, violation of
constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-compliance with rules of
natural justice and perversity."
(emphasis supplied)
26. These principles have been restated by the subsequent
Constitution Bench in Amarinder Singh11, in paras 53 and 54. Further,
it would be useful to advert to the observations in paras 87 and 88 of
the same decision in the context of the concerns about the intrusion
60, paras 87-88)
"Concerns about intrusion into the executive and judicial domain
87. The doctrine of separation of powers is an inseparable part of
the evolution of parliamentary democracy itself. Renowned French
philosopher Montesquieu had drawn the attention of political theorists
to the dangers inherent in the concentration of legislative, executive
and judicial powers in one authority and stressed on the necessity of
checks and balances in constitutional governance. Our institutions of
governance have been intentionally founded on the principle of
separation of powers and the Constitution does not give unfettered
power to any organ. All the three principal organs are expected to work
in harmony and in consonance with the spirit and essence of the
Constitution. It is clear that a legislative body is not entrusted with the
power of adjudicating a case once an appropriate forum is in existence
under the constitutional scheme.
88. It would be pertinent to cite the following observations made
by M.H. Beg, J. (as his Lordship then was) in Indira Nehru Gandhi V.
`392.
One of these basic principles seems to me to be that,
just as courts are not constitutionally competent to legislate under
the guise of interpretation, so also neither our Parliament nor any
State Legislature, in the purported exercise of any kind of law-
making power, perform an essentially judicial function by virtually
withdrawing a particular case, pending in any court, and taking
upon itself the duty to decide it by an application of law or its own
standards to the facts of that case. This power must at least be
first constitutionally taken away from the court concerned and
vested in another authority before it can be lawfully exercised by
that other authority. It is not a necessary or even a natural
incident of a "constituent power". As Hans Kelsen points out, in
his General Theory of Law and the State (see p. 143), while
creation and annulment of all general norms, whether basic or not
so basic, is essentially a legislative function, their interpretation
and application to findings reached, after a correct ascertainment
of facts involved in an individual case, by employing the judicial
technique, is really a judicial function. Neither of the three
constitutionally separate organs of State can, according to the
basic scheme of our Constitution today, leap outside the
boundaries of its own constitutionally assigned sphere or orbit of
authority into that of the other. This is the logical meaning of the
principle of supremacy of the Constitution.''
(emphasis supplied)
27. To the same end, dictum of the Constitution Bench in Sub-
Committee on Judicial Accountability V. Union of India²4 may
be
apposite. In para 61 of the reported decision, the Court observed thus
:
"61. But where, as in this country and unlike in England, there is
a written Constitution which constitutes the fundamental and in that
sense a "higher law" and acts as a limitation upon the legislature
and other organs of the State as grantees under the Constitution,
the usual incidents of parliamentary sovereignty do not obtain and
the concept is one of "limited government". Judicial review is,
indeed, an incident of and flows from this
concept of the fundamental and the higher law being the touchstone of
the limits of the powers of the various organs of the State which derive
power and authority under the Constitution and that the judicial wing is
the interpreter of the Constitution and, therefore, of the limits of
authority of the different organs of the State. It is to be noted that the
British Parliament with the Crown is supreme and its powers are
unlimited and courts have no power of judicial review of legislation."
(emphasis supplied)
28. The Court then noted that this doctrine is in one sense the
doctrine of ultra vires in the constitutional law and in a federal set up,
the judiciary becomes the guardian of the Constitution. It enunciated
that the rule in Bradlaugh V. Gossett25 was inapplicable to proceedings
of colonial legislature governed by the written Constitution. In para 66,
the Court expounded as follows : (Sub-Committee on Judicial
"66. The principles in Bradlaugh25 is that even a statutory right if
it related to the sphere where Parliament and not the courts had
exclusive jurisdiction would be a matter of Parliament's own concern.
But the principle cannot be extended where the matter is not merely
one of procedure but of substantive law concerning matters beyond
the parliamentary procedure. Even in matters of procedure the
constitutional provisions are binding as the legislations are
enforceable. Of the interpretation of the Constitution and as to what
law is the courts have the constitutional duty to say what the law is.
The question whether the motion has lapsed is a matter to be
pronounced upon the basis of the provisions of the Constitution and
the relevant laws. Indeed, the learned Attorney General submitted
that the question whether as an interpretation of the constitutional
processes and laws, such a motion lapses or not is exclusively for the
courts to decide."
(emphasis supplied)
29. In the Indian context, the power of the legislature is not
absolute, as noted by the Constitution Bench in Raja Ram Pal³ in para
"398. We are of the view that the manner of exercise of the power
or privilege by Parliament is immune from judicial scrutiny only to
the extent indicated in Article 122(1), that is to say the court will
decline to interfere if the grievance brought before it is restricted to
allegations of "irregularity of procedure". But in case gross illegality
or violation of constitutional provisions is shown, the judicial review
will not be inhibited in any manner by Article 122, or for that matter
by Article 105. If one was to accept what was alleged while
rescinding the resolution of expulsion by the Seventh Lok Sabha with
the conclusion that it was 'inconsistent with and violative
of the well-accepted principles of the law of parliamentary privilege and
the basic safeguards assured to all enshrined in the Constitution', it
would be a partisan action in the name of exercise of privilege. We are
not going into this issue but citing the incident as an illustration."
(emphasis supplied)
30. After having said as above, the Court proceeded to examine the
extent of circumspection to be observed by the courts. That had been
67, paras 414-17)
"414. In State of Rajasthan V. Union of India while dealing with
the issues arising out of communication by the then Union Home
Minister to the nine States asking them to advise their respective
Governors to observe the Legislative Assemblies and therefore seek
mandate from the people, this Court observed in para 40 as under :
'40. This Court has never abandoned its constitutional function
as the final judge of constitutionality of all acts purported to be
done under the authority of the Constitution. It has not refused to
determine questions either of fact or of law so long as it has found
itself possessed of power to do it and the cause of justice to be
capable of being vindicated by its actions. But, it cannot assume
unto itself powers the Constitution lodges elsewhere or undertake
tasks entrusted by the Constitution to other departments of State
which may be better equipped to perform them. The scrupulously
discharged duties of all guardians of the Constitution include the
duty not to transgress the limitations of their own constitutionally
circumscribed powers by trespassing into what is properly the
domain of other constitutional organs. Questions of political
wisdom or executive policy only could not be subjected to judicial
control. No doubt executive policy must also be subordinated to
constitutionally sanctioned purposes. It has its sphere and
limitations. But, so long as it operates within that sphere, its
operations are immune from judicial interference. This is also a
part of the doctrine of a rough separation of powers under the
supremacy of the Constitution repeatedly propounded by this
Court and to which the Court unswervingly adheres even when its
views differ or change on the correct interpretation of a particular
constitutional provision."
415. We reaffirm the said resolve and find no reason why in
the facts and circumstances at hand this Court should take a
different view so as to abandon its constitutional functions as
the final judge of constitutionality of all acts purported to be
done under the authority of the Constitution, though at the
same time refraining from transgressing into the sphere that
is properly the domain of Parliament.
416. The learned Additional Solicitor General submits that in U.P.
Assembly case (Special Reference No. 1 of 1964) 9 the Court had
placed reliance on Articles 208 and 212 which contemplate that
rules can be framed by the legislature subject to the
provisions of the Constitution which in turn implies that such
rules are compliant with the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Part III. He submits that if the Rules framed under Article 118
(which corresponds to Article 208) are consistent with Part
III of the Constitution then the exercise of powers, privileges
and immunities is bound to be a fair exercise and Parliament
can be safely attributed such an intention.
417. While it is true that there is no challenge to the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States, as made
by the two Houses of Parliament in exercise of enabling powers
under Article 118(1), we are of the opinion that mere
availability of rules is never a guarantee that they have been
duly followed. What we are concerned with, given the limits
prescribed in Article 122(1), is not "irregularity of procedure" but
illegalities or unconstitutionalities."
(emphasis in original and emphasis supplied in bold)
31. From the exposition in these successive Constitution Bench
decisions referred to above, it is not possible to countenance the
submission of the learned counsel for the respondent State that the
enquiry must be limited to one of the parameters specified in Raja Ram
Pal³ and, in this case, only clause (s) - "The proceedings which may be
tainted on account of substantive or gross illegality or
unconstitutionality are not protected from judicial scrutiny". On the
other hand, we lean in favour of taking the view that each of the
parameters is significant and permissible area of judicial review in
relation to exercise of parliamentary privileges including clauses (f),
(g), (s) and (u). In one sense, clause (u) is a comprehensive parameter
articulated by the Constitution Bench in Raja Ram Pal³, as it predicates
"431.
(u) an ouster clause attaching finality to a determination
does ordinarily oust the power of the court to review the decision but
not on grounds of lack of jurisdiction or it being a nullity for some
reason such as gross illegality, irrationality, violation of constitutional
mandate, mala fides, non-compliance with rules of natural justice
and perversity."
32. The Constitution. bv itself. does not specify the limitation on the
privileges of the legislature, but, indubitably, those privileges are
subject to the provisions of the Constitution [as is predicated in the
opening part of Article 194(1) as also in Article 208(1) requiring the
House of the legislature to make Rules for regulating its procedure],
which ought to include the rights guaranteed to the citizens under Part
III of the Constitution. The moment it is demonstrated
that it is a case of infraction of any of the rights under Para III of the
Constitution including ascribable to Articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution, the exercise of power by the legislature would be rendered
unconstitutional. For attracting Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution, it
is open to the petitioner to demonstrate that the action of the
legislature is manifestly arbitrary. The arbitrariness can be attributed to
different aspects. Applying that test, it could be a case of irrationality of
the resolution/decision of the House. Indeed, in this case, the Court is
not called upon to enquire into the proportionality of such a
resolution/decision.
33. There is marked distinction between the expression "rational"
and "proportional". The expression "proportion" is derived from a Latin
word "proportio" or "proportionalis". It means corresponding in size or
amount to something else. To wit, the punishment should be
proportional to the crime - whereas, expression "rational" is derived
from a Latin word "ratio" or "rationalis". It means action is based on or
in accordance with the reason or logic or so to say sensible or logical.
The rationality of action can be tested, both on the ground of power
inhering in the legislature and the exercise of that power.
34. Keeping the stated principles in mind, we must proceed to
analyse the grounds of challenge in these petitions. The foremost
ground is that it is imperative for the House to adhere to the procedure
prescribed in the Rules framed by the House under Article 208 of the
Constitution.
35. The Constitution Bench of this Court in M.S.M. Sharma had
8
occasion to deal with the efficacy of the Rules so framed under Article
208 of the Constitution. In para 2927, the Court noted that Article 194
(3) read with Rules
framed under Article 208 had laid down the procedure for enforcing its
powers, privileges and immunities. Further, the Legislative Assembly
has the powers, privileges and immunities of the House of Commons
and if the petitioner is deprived of his personal liberty as a result of the
proceedings before the Committee of Privileges, such deprivation will
be in accordance with procedure established by law and the petitioner
cannot complain of the breach, actual or threatened, of his fundamental
right under Article 21. This dictum presupposes that action taken under
the Rules framed under Article 208 of the Constitution and in
conformity therewith is compliance of the procedure established by law
for the purpose of Article 21 of the Constitution.
36. In Ratilal Bhanji Mithani V. Collector of Customs28 the
Constitution Bench restated the aforenoted position in the following
words: (AIR p. 1641, para 8)
"8.
As explained in M.S.M. Sharma case8 these powers and the
procedure prescribed by the rules has the sanction of enacted law
and an order of committal for contempt of the Assembly is according
to procedure established by law. Das, C.J., speaking for four learned
Judges said at SCR p. 861 : (AIR pp. 410-11, para 29)
29.
Article 194(3) confers on the Legislative Assembly those
powers, privileges and immunities and Article 208 confers power
on it to frame rules. The Bihar Legislative Assembly has framed
rules in exercise of its powers under that Article. It follows,
therefore, that Article 194(3) read with the rules so framed has
laid down the procedure for enforcing its powers, privileges and
immunities. If, therefore, the Legislative Assembly has the
powers, privileges and immunities of the House of Commons and
if the petitioner is eventually deprived of his personal liberty as a
result of the proceedings before the Committee of Privileges, such
deprivation will be in accordance with procedure established by
law and the petitioner cannot complain of the breach, actual or
threatened, of his fundamental right under Article 21.
Subba Rao, J. in his minority judgment in that case and the Court in Special
Reference No. 1 of 19649 did not say anything to the contrary on this point."
(emphasis supplied)
37. It is settled law that even rules made to exercise the powers and
privileges of State Legislature constitute law within the meaning of
Article 13. This is exposited in Special Reference No. 1 of 19649 It is
held that when the State Legislatures purport to exercise this power,
they will undoubtedly be acting under Article 246 read with Entry 39 of
List II. The enactment of such a law will, therefore, have to be treated
as a law within the meaning of Article 13.
38. In the backdrop of these observations, the plea taken by the
State that the rules are neither statutory rules nor binding on the
House will be of no avail. Indeed, the Constitution Bench of this Court
in Sub Committee on Judicial Accountability in para 94 noted as
"94. Second view is to be preferred. It enables the entire process
of removal being regulated by a law of Parliament - ensures
uniformity and reduces chances of arbitrariness. Article 118 is a
general provision conferring on each House of Parliament the power
to make its own rules of procedure. These rules are not binding on
the House and can be altered by the House at any time. A breach of
such rules amounts to an irregularity and is not subject to judicial
review in view of Article 122."
(emphasis supplied)
These observations have been noted while deliberating over the legal
question as to whether the law made by Parliament in the matter of
removal of a Judge of the High Court ought to prevail over the Rules
framed by the House under Article 118 (corresponding to Article 208,
applicable to State Legislative Assembly). This Court held that the
parliamentary law is of higher quality and efficacy than the Rules under
Article 118. This, however, had not whittled down the legal exposition
that the Rules framed by the Legislative Assembly under Article 208 of
the Constitution is the procedure established by law for the purpose of
Article 21 of the Constitution.
39. Be that as it may, it is well settled that the Rules so framed can
be altered by the House at any time. Until the rules are altered,
however, the House is ordinarily guided by the procedure prescribed in
the Rules framed under Article 208 of the Constitution. At the same
time, proceedings inside the legislature cannot be called into question
on the ground that the same have not been carried on in accordance
with the rules of business as restated in Kihoto Hollohan20. It is,
however, enough for the present to observe that the Rules framed
under Article 208 acquire the status of procedure established by law for
the purpose of Article 21 of the Constitution as noticed in M.S.M.
Sharma8. This observation has been quoted with approval by another
Constitution Bench again in Raja Ram Pal³, inter alia, in paras 53, 167,
338, 416 and 417.
40. Viewed thus, even though the legislature has the prerogative to
deviate from the rules including to alter the rules; until then, and even
otherwise, it is expected to adhere to the "express substantive
stipulation" (which is not mere procedure) in the Rules framed under
Article 208 of the Constitution and the principle underlying therein,
being procedure established by law.
41. As aforesaid, the dispensation prescribed under the Rules to
exercise power to order withdrawal of Member (suspension)
is
ascribable to Rule 53 of the Rules which reads thus:
"53. Power to order withdrawal of Member.-The Speaker
may direct any Member who refuses to obey his decision, or whose
conduct is, in his opinion, grossly disorderly, to withdraw
immediately from the Assembly and any Member so ordered to
withdraw shall do so forthwith and shall absent himself during the
remainder of the day's meeting. If any Member is ordered to
withdraw a second time in the same Session, the Speaker may direct
the Member to absent himself from the meetings of the Assembly for
any period not longer than the remainder of the Session, and the
Member so directed shall absent himself accordingly. The Member so
directed to be absent shall, during the period of such absence, be
deemed to be absent with the permission of the Assembly within the
meaning of clause (4) of Article 190 of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
42. Rule 53 not only speaks about the procedure to be adopted for
passing the drastic order of withdrawal of a Member from the House but
also about the substantive disciplinary or the rationality of the self-
security measure to be taken in a graded (objective standard) manner.
The non-compliance of or deviation from the former (procedure) may be
non-justiciable. However, in regard to the substantive disciplinary or
the rationality of the self-security measure inflicted upon the erring
Member, is open to judicial review on the touchstone of being
unconstitutional, grossly illegal and irrational or arbitrary.
43. In terms of Rule 53, the power is exercised by the Speaker being
a quasi-judicial order directing the Member to withdraw from the
meetings of the Assembly. The Speaker is expected to exercise this
power only in case of conduct of the Member being "grossly disorderly"
and in a graded objective manner. The raison d'être is to ensure that
the business of the House on the given day or the ongoing Session, as
the case may be, can be carried on in an orderly manner and without
any disruption owing to misconduct of one or more members. The
expression used in the stated Rule is "grossly disorderly".
44. The expression "grossly disorderly" has not been defined in the
Rules. The meaning of the expression "gross" as given in Black's Law
Dictionary29 reads thus:
"gross, adj. (14c) 1. Conspicuous by reason of size or other
attention-getting qualities; esp., obvious by reason of magnitude <a
gross Corinthian column>. 2. Undiminished by deduction; entire
<gross profits>. 3. Not specific or detailed; general <a gross
estimate>. 4. Coarse in meaning or sense <gross slang> 5.
Repulsive in behaviour or appearance; sickening <a gross fellow with
gross habits>. 6. Beyond all reasonable measure; flagrant <a gross
injustice>."
"Grossly", is an adverb and indicative of relatively higher degree of
misconduct or so to say extremely wrong and deviant.
45. The expression "disorder" as defined in Black's Law Dictionary29
is as follows:
"disorder. (1877) 1. A lack of proper arrangement <disorder of
the files>. 2. An irregularity <a disorder in the proceedings>. 3. A
public disturbance; a riot. See CIVIL DISORDER. 4. A disturbance in
mental or physical health <an emotional disorder> <a liver
disorder>."
The expression "disorderly" as defined in Black's Law Dictionary30
is
as
follows:
"Disorderly. Contrary to the rules of good order and behaviour;
violative of the public peace or good order; turbulent, riotous, or
indecent."
In Concise Oxford Dictionary31, the expression "disorderly" has been
defined thus:
"disorderly, adj 1 untidy; confused. 2 irregular; unruly; riotous. 3
Law contrary to public order or morality."
The expression "disorderly conduct" as defined in Black's Law
Dictionary29 is as follows:
disorderly conduct. See CONDUCT
conduct, n. (15c) Personal behaviour, whether by action or
inaction, verbal or nonverbal; the manner in which a person
behaves; collectively, a person's deeds.
Conduct does not include
the actor's natural death or a death that results from behaviour
consciously engaged in but not reasonably expected to have this
result. - conduct, vb.
46. Taking the totality of the meaning of the expressions "grossly"
and "disorderly", it must follow that the conduct of the Member is such
that it was impeding the smooth or orderly functioning of the House,
and may also be of such a nature that it is likely to bring disrepute to
the House. It may involve varied situations and, therefore, implied
exercise of rational corrective mechanism is quintessential. The action
of suspension or directing withdrawal of a Member from the meetings of
the Assembly is in the nature of self-security and is essentially directed
to ensure that the House can then protect itself against obstruction, or
disturbance of its ongoing proceedings owing to the misconduct of any
of its members. That power is different from the privilege to inflict
punishment on a Member, which may require higher degree of
deprivation of the Member over and above participating in the
proceedings of the House during the Session. In a given case, it can be
in the form of expulsion being the highest degree of exclusion of the
Member from the House. Yet another would be penal, in case of
ordering imprisonment owing to act of contempt of the House. We shall
elaborate on this aspect a little later while dealing with the challenge on
the ground of impugned resolution being grossly irrational.
47. Suffice it to observe that Rule 53 of the Rules provides for a
graded (rational and objective standard) approach to be adopted by the
Speaker for ensuring orderly conduct of the business of the House. In
the present case, however, the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs
introduced a motion in the House for initiating action for contempt of
the House, which the Chairman allowed it to be put to vote instantly at
1440 hours on the same day and it was passed by the House by
majority in no time. Indeed, if it is a case of grossly disorderly
behaviour in the House, the Speaker/Chairman himself is free to take
instantaneous decision to order withdrawal of the Member from the
meetings of the Assembly during the remainder of the day's meeting
and if it is a case of repeat misconduct in the same Session-for the
remainder of the Session.
48. Concededly, there is nothing in the constitutional scheme or the
Rules framed under Article 208 to prevent a Member of the House to
move a motion for directing withdrawal of a Member on the ground of
his grossly disorderly conduct. Further, if the Speaker can suo motu
direct the Member to withdraw from the Assembly on the same day
instantly to secure smooth functioning of the proceedings, for the same
logic, even the House could pass a resolution itself on a motion being
moved by a Member of the House instantly with the concurrence of the
Speaker on such a motion.
49. In the present case, the Chairman entertained the subject
motion and called upon the House to vote thereon, which had the effect
of giving tacit consent if not explicit concurrence to the same. In that
sense, it is not a case of resolution passed by the House (to suspend its
members) as being without jurisdiction. It is a different matter that if
the Speaker/Chairman was to do so, it could be only under Rule 53 in a
graded manner for the remainder of the day and for repeat misconduct
in the same Session-for the remainder of the Session. That would be a
logical and rational approach consistent with the constitutional tenets.
50. If the House takes upon itself to discipline its members, it is
expected to adopt the same graded (rational and objective standard)
approach on the lines predicated in Rule 53. That would be a case of
rational action taken by the House as per the procedure established by
law. The expression "rational" is defined in Black's Law Dictionary29 as
follows:
"rational, adj. (14c) 1. Endowed with the faculties of cognition
traditionally thought to distinguish humans from the brutes <man as
a rational being>. 2. Based on logic rather than emotion; attained
through clear thinking; not absurd, preposterous, foolish, or fanciful
<a rational conclusion: >. 3. (Of a person) able to think clearly and
sensibly; clear-headed and right-minded <Jones was rational at the
time of the woman's death>."
As opposed to a rational decision, it would be a case of irrational or
preposterous approach. The expression "irrational" as defined in Black's
Law Dictionary29 is as follows:
"irrational, adj. (16c) Not guided by reason or by a fair
consideration of the facts <an irrational ruling>. See ARBITRARY."
arbitrary, adj. (15c) 1. Depending on individual discretion; of,
relating to, or involving a determination made without
consideration of or regard for facts, circumstances, fixed rules, or
procedures. 2. (Of a judicial decision) founded on prejudice or
preference rather than on reason or fact.
This type of decision is often termed arbitrary and capricious.
Cf. CAPRICIOUS. - arbitrariness, n.
51. A priori, if the resolution passed by the House was to provide for
suspension beyond the period prescribed under the stated Rule, it
would be substantively illegal, irrational and unconstitutional. In that,
the graded (rational and objective standard) approach predicated in
Rule 53 is the benchmark to be observed by the Speaker to enable him
to ensure smooth working of the House, without any obstruction or
impediment and for keeping the recalcitrant Member away from the
House for a period maximum up to the remainder of the entire Session.
52. Inflicting suspension for a period "beyond the period necessary"
than to ensure smooth working/functioning of the House during the
Session "by itself"; and also, as per the underlying objective standard
specified in Rule 53, indubitably, suffer from the vice of being grossly
irrational measure adopted against the erring Member and also
substantively illegal and unconstitutional.
53. It is a different matter if the House had ended up with resolution
of expulsion of the Member, which power in a given situation it could
legitimately exercise, as held in Raja Ram Pal³. That action would not
visit the Member with disqualification and also allow him to get re-
elected from the same constituency within the statutory period of six
months from the date of vacation of his seat. However, if it is a case of
suspension for a period beyond the remainder of the Session, it would
entail in unnecessary (unessential) deprivation. And longer or excessive
deprival would not only be regarded as irrational, but closer to or
bordering on perversity. Resultantly, such an action would be violative
of procedure established by law and also manifestly arbitrary, grossly
irrational and illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution.
54. Be it noted that suspension beyond the remainder period of the
ongoing Session would not only be grossly irrational measure, but also
violative of basic democratic values owing to unessential deprivation of
the Member concerned and more importantly, the constituency would
remain unrepresented in the Assembly. It would also impact the
democratic set-up as a whole by permitting the thin majority
Government (coalition Government) of the day to manipulate the
numbers of the Opposition Party in the House in an undemocratic
manner. Not only that, the Opposition will not be able to effectively
participate in the discussion/debate in the House owing to the constant
fear of its members being suspended for longer period. There would be
no purposeful or meaningful debates but one in terrorem and as per the
whims of the majority. That would not be healthy for the democracy as
a whole.
55. It is well-established that fundamental rights are guaranteed by
Part III of the Constitution, out of which Articles 14, 19 and 21 are the
most frequently invoked to test the validity of the executive as well as
legislative actions when these actions are subjected to judicial scrutiny.
Different Articles in the Constitution under chapter Fundamental Rights
and the Directive Principles in Part IV ought to be read as an integral
and incorporeal whole with possible overlapping with the subject-
matter of what is to be protected by its various provisions particularly
the fundamental rights. The sweep of Article 21 is expansive enough to
govern the action of dismembering a Member from the House of the
Legislative Assembly in the form of expulsion or be it a case of
suspension by directing withdrawal from the meeting of the Assembly
for the remainder of the Session.
56. Be that as it may, it is evident from the impugned resolution
that it has been passed by the majority votes in the House immediately
after it was put to vote by the Chairman. It was in fact introduced as a
motion for initiating action for having committed contempt of the House
which ordinarily ought to have proceeded under Part XVIII of the Rules
dealing with Privileges. That would have required constitution of a
Committee of Privileges to enquire into the entire matter by giving
opportunity of hearing to the persons concerned. Instead of adopting
that procedure, the House itself chose to direct withdrawal of the
petitioners from the meetings of the Assembly for a period of one year
- which direction is neither ascribable to the dispensation prescribed in
Part XVIII of the Rules or Rule 53 enabling the Speaker to do so.
57. As aforementioned, it is not a case of procedural irregularity as
such. Whereas, the decision taken by the House in this case, is one of
substantive illegality in directing suspension beyond the period of
remainder of the Session in which the motion was presented. We say so
because, the period of suspension in excess of the period essential to
do so much less in a graded manner including on principle underlying
Rule 53, would be antithesis to rational or objective standard approach
for ensuring orderly functioning of the House during the ongoing
Session.
58. Reverting to the challenge to the impugned resolution being
grossly irrational. As noticed earlier, Rule 53 provides for a graded
(rational and objective standard) approach. The timeline as specified in
Rule 53 is with a view to address the immediate concern of the House
for ensuring orderly conduct of the business of the House in the given
Session. This action is implied on the doctrine of necessity. The Speaker
and for that matter, even the House as a whole or by majority, would
be within its power to resort to such a mechanism being rational
measure. Exceeding the stated timeline is a substantive matter and not
a procedural irregularity. It would raise a basic question as to what
purpose would be served by withdrawing the Member from the House
for successive Sessions falling within that period of one year. Indeed, if
the conduct of the Member is gross warranting his removal from the
Assembly even beyond the period of sixty days [Article 190(4)] or six
months (Section 151-A of the 1951 Act), the House is capable of
invoking its inherent power of expulsion of such a Member, which is a
greater power.
59. Indubitably, suspension for a day or for the remainder of the
Session, would be of a lesser degree of exercise of that power.
However, it is not open to contend that the higher degree of power
would include power to suspend the Member beyond the period
essential to keep him/her away from the Assembly for ensuring orderly
conduct of the business of the House. As expounded in Amarinder
Singh11, the important consideration for scrutinising the exercise of
legislative privileges is whether the same is necessary to safeguard the
integrity of the legislative functions. This Court had recognised that the
legislature's power to punish for its contempt was not untrammelled.
That power of legislative chamber to punish for its own contempt must
coincide with the legislature's interest in protecting the integrity of its
function. In other words, the suspension of a Member must be
preferred as a short-term or a temporary measure for restoring order in
the functioning of the Assembly Session concerned for completing its
scheduled business within time and by way of disciplinary measure
against the incorrigible member(s).
60. The word "suspension" is necessarily linked to attendance of the
Member in the House. Thus, the suspension may be resorted to merely
for ensuring orderly conduct of the business of the House during the
Session concerned. Anything in excess of that would be irrational
suspension. This is so because the Member represents the constituency
from where he has been duly elected and longer suspension would
entail in deprivation of the constituency to be represented in the House.
It is true that right to vote and be represented is integral to our
democratic process and it is not an absolute right. Indeed, the
constituency cannot have any right to be represented by a disqualified
or expelled Member. However, their representative cannot be kept away
from the House in the guise of suspension beyond the necessary
(rational) period linked to the ongoing Assembly Session, including the
timeline referred to in Article 190(4) of the Constitution and Section
151-A of the 1951 Act.
61. Be that as it may, suspension is essentially a disciplinary
measure. It must follow that suspension for a period of one year would
assume the character of punitive and punishment worse than
expulsion. For, suspension for long period and beyond the Session has
the effect of creating a de facto vacancy though not a de jure vacancy.
The argument of the State that despite suspension from the House, the
members would continue to discharge all other functions outside the
House as an elected representative. This plea, in our view, is tenuous.
For, the effect of such suspension is visited not only on the
constituency that goes unrepresented for potentially long and
unessential time, but also on the functioning of the Assembly itself.
Apart from a role in bringing to light the special needs or difficulties of
the constituency, a Member also plays a role in various motions,
debates, votes, etc. In any case, this plea cannot
whittle down the logic requiring limited action essential for orderly
functioning of the House on the given day or at best, the Session for
completion of its scheduled business for the relevant Session.
62. Suffice it to observe that one-year suspension is worse than
"expulsion", "disqualification" or "resignation" - insofar as the right of
the constituency to be represented before the House/Assembly is
concerned. In that, long suspension is bound to affect the rights
harsher than expulsion wherein a mid-term election is held within the
specified time in terms of Section 151-A of the 1951 Act, not later than
six months. Thus, the impugned resolution is unreasonable, irrational,
and arbitrary and liable to be set aside.
Having said this, we may now turn to two decisions of the Privy
Council referred to and discussed by the Constitution Bench in Raja
23)
"284. Finally, in Barton it involved the suspension of a Member
from the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales. The power of
suspension for an indefinite time was held to be unavailable to the
Legislative Assembly as it was said to have trespassed into the
punitive field. The judgment was delivered by the Earl of Selborne.
Referring to Kielley3 and Doyle34 the Court observed : (Barton
case AC pp. 203 & 205)
,
It results from those authorities that no powers of that kind
are incident to or inherent in a Colonial Legislative Assembly
(without express grant), except "such as are necessary to the
existence of such a body, and the proper exercise of the functions
which it is intended to execute".
*
*
*
Powers to suspend toties quoties, sitting after sitting, in case
of repeated offences (and, if may be, till submission or apology),
and also to expel for aggravated or persistent misconduct, appear
to be sufficient to meet even the extreme case of a Member whose
conduct is habitually obstructive or disorderly.
To argue that expulsion is the greater power, and
suspension the less, and that the greater must include all
degrees of the less, seems to their Lordships fallacious. The
rights of constituents ought not, in a question of this kind, to
be left out of sight. Those rights would be much more
seriously interfered with by an unnecessarily prolonged
suspension than by expulsion, after which a new election
would immediately be held.'
285. The Court went on to examine what is necessary and found
that an indefinite suspension could never be considered necessary.
286. The learned counsel for the petitioners have relied on the
above distinction and submitted that the limited power does not
envisage expulsion and can only be used for ex facie contempts.
287. We are not persuaded to subscribe to the propositions
advanced on behalf of the petitioners. Even if we were to accept this
distinction as applicable to the Indian Parliament, in our opinion, the
power to expel would be available.
288. Firstly, Barton which allows only a limited power to
punish for contempt, finds that even though the Legislative
Assembly does not have the power to indefinitely suspend, as
that was punitive in nature, the Assembly would have the
power to expel, considering expulsion a non-punitive power.
Secondly, the objection that the limited power could only deal
with ex facie contempt, is not tenable.
289. In the above context, reference may be made to Lawrence
Joseph Harnett V. William Patrick Crick35 This case involved the
suspension of a Member of the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales until the verdict of the jury in the pending criminal trial
against the Member had been delivered. The suspension was
challenged. When the matter came up before the Privy Council, the
respondents argued that : (AC p. 472)
The Legislative Assembly had no inherent power to pass [the
Standing Order]. Its inherent powers were limited to protective
and defensive measures necessary for the proper exercise of its
functions and the conduct of its business. They did not extend to
punitive measures in the absence of express statutory power in
that behalf, but only to protective measures.
The fact that a
criminal charge is pending against the respondent does not affect
or obstruct the course of business in the Chamber or relate to its
orderly conduct.'
290. This argument was rejected and the House of Lords allowed
the appeal. Lord MacNaghten, delivering the judgment, initially
observed that : (William Patrick Crick case35, AC p. 475)
\
No one would probably contend that the orderly conduct of
the Assembly would be disturbed or affected by the mere fact that
a criminal charge is pending against a Member of the House.'
291. But he found that certain peculiar circumstances of the case
deserved to be given weight. The Court went on to hold thus :
(William Patrick Crick case35, AC p. 476)
If the House itself has taken the less favourable view of the
plaintiff's attitude [an insult and challenge to the House], and has
judged that the occasion justified temporary suspension, not by
way of punishment, but in self-defence, it seems impossible for
the Court to declare that the House was so wrong in its judgment,
and the Standing Order and the resolution founded upon it so
foreign to the purpose contemplated by the Act, that the
proceedings must be declared invalid.
292. The above case thus establishes that even if the House
of legislature has limited powers, such power is not only
restricted to ex facie contempts, but even acts committed
outside the House. It is open to the Assembly to use its power
for "protective" purposes, and the acts that it can act upon are
not only those that are committed in the House, but upon
anything that lowers the dignity of the House. Thus, the
petitioners' submission that House only has the power to remove
obstructions during its proceedings cannot be accepted.
293. It is axiomatic to state that expulsion is always in respect of
a Member. At the same time, it needs to be borne in mind that a
Member is part of the House due to which his or her conduct always
has a direct bearing upon the perception of the House. Any
legislative body must act through its Members and the connection
between the conduct of the Members and the perception of the
House is strong. We, therefore, conclude that even if Parliament
had only the limited remedial power to punish for contempt,
the power to expel would be well within the limits of such
remedial contempt power."
(emphasis in original and emphasis supplied in bold italics)
64. The two decisions of the Privy Council (Barton6 and Lawrence
Joseph Harnett35) were pressed into service in that case to answer the
plea that the legislature has inherent limited remedial power to punish
for contempt by way of suspension of its Member and cannot resort to
expulsion of the Member. The Constitution Bench noticed that even
these two decisions of the Privy Council,
recognised inherent power of the legislature to expel its Member and,
thus, negatived the plea of the petitioner in that regard. This Court
after analysing the said decisions concluded that the legislatures
established in India by the Constitution, including Parliament under
Article 105(3), need not be denied the claim to the power of expulsion
arising out of remedial power of contempt.
65. What emerges from the stated conclusion is that the
Constitution Bench declared that the inherent power of the legislature
is not absolute, but limited remedial power to punish for contempt and
to take such measures as are necessary for orderly functioning of the
proceedings of the House.
dealt with suspension of the Member from the Legislative Assembly of
New South Wales. In that case, the resolution passed by the House did
not mention about the time-frame of suspension of the Member. That
was challenged by the aggrieved Member being irrational and
unnecessary. That plea was considered by the Privy Council keeping in
mind its earlier decisions in Edward Kielley33 and Thomas William
the Constitution Bench in Raja Ram Pal³ as well). After noticing these
decisions, the Privy Council in Barton° 6 noted that those authorities had
dealt with situation that no powers of that kind are incident to or
inherent in a Colonial Legislative Assembly (without express grant),
except such as are necessary to the existence of such a body, and the
proper exercise of the functions which it is intended to execute.
67. It must follow that in the absence of any express provision
bestowing power in the legislature to suspend its member(s) beyond
the term of the ongoing Session, the inherent power of the legislature
can be invoked only to the extent necessary and for proper exercise of
the functions of the House at the relevant point of time. No more. For
that purpose, it could resort to protective and self-defensive powers
alone and not punitive at all. This logic is reinforced from the dictum in
Barton wherein the Privy Council noted as follows : (AC p. 203)
"
`If a Member of a Colonial House of Assembly is guilty of
disorderly conduct in the House while sitting, he may be removed or
excluded for a time, or even expelled
The right to remove for self-
security is one thing, the right to inflict punishment is another
If
the good sense and conduct of the members of Colonial Legislatures
prove insufficient to secure order and decency of debate, the law
would sanction the use of that degree of force which might be
necessary to remove the person excluded from the place of meeting,
and to keep him excluded. "34
68. The Privy Council in the same decision then proceeded to
observe as follows : (Barton 6, AC p. 204)
"
The principle on which the implied power is given confines it
within the limits of what is required by the assumed necessity. That
necessity appears to their Lordships to extend as far as the whole
duration of the particular meeting or sitting of the Assembly in the
course of which the offence may have been committed. It seems to
be reasonably necessary that some substantial interval should be
interposed between the suspensory resolution and the resumption of
his place in the Assembly by the offender, in order to give
opportunity for the subsidence of heat and passion, and for reflection
on his own conduct by the person suspended; nor would anything
less be generally sufficient for the vindication of the authority and
dignity of the Assembly."
(emphasis supplied)
These observations are significant and apposite in the context of the
issue under consideration. And we must lean in favour of adopting the
same. Inasmuch as this exposition recognises the fact that implied or
inherent power of the legislature must be reckoned to the extent only
to what is required to be done by the House for effective and orderly
functioning of its business during the ongoing Session and not beyond.
This is more emphatically expounded by the Privy Council in the
following words : (Barton6, AC pp. 204-05)
"The power, therefore, of suspending a Member guilty of
obstruction or disorderly conduct during the continuance of any
current sitting, is, in their Lordships' judgment, reasonably
necessary for the proper exercise of the functions of any Legislative
Assembly of this kind; and it may very well be, that the same
doctrine of reasonable necessity would authorise a suspension until
submission or apology by the offending Member; which, if he were
refractory, might cause it to be prolonged (not by the arbitrary
discretion of the Assembly, but by his own wilful default) for some
further time."
69. Again, it went on to observe as follows : (Barton 6, AC p. 205)
"
If these are the limits of the inherent or implied power,
reasonably deducible from the principle of general necessity, they
have the advantage of drawing a simple practical line between
defensive and punitive action on the part of the Assembly. A power
of unconditional suspension, for an indefinite time, or for a definite
time depending only on the irresponsible discretion of the Assembly
itself, is more than the necessity of self-defence seems to require,
and is dangerously liable, in possible cases, to excess or abuse."
(emphasis supplied)
70. The essence of the analysis done in Barton 6 is about the logic
and rationality behind the need to suspend a Member. It
unambiguously held that the same be regarded as temporary by way of
self-protective mechanism of the legislature to ensure orderly conduct
of its business in the House during the
sitting. For that very reason, Rule 53 provides for a graded corrective
action, namely, on the first occasion, the Speaker may suspend the
Member for the remainder of the day and if the misbehaviour is
repeated in the same Session-for the remainder of the Session. The
observations in Barton6 would reinforce this logic of need to adhere to a
graded approach, which reads thus : (Barton 6, AC p. 206)
"
"Suspension" must be temporary; the words, "suspended from
the service of the House", may be satisfied by referring them to the
attendance of the Member in the House during that particular sitting.
So much as this is necessary to make the suspension effective, more
is not."
(emphasis supplied)
71. In light of this decision, it must follow that only a graded
approach is the essence of a rational and logical approach; and only
such action of the legislature which is necessary for orderly conduct of
its scheduled business of the ongoing Session can be regarded as
rational approach. Suspension beyond the Session would be bordering
on punishing not only the Member concerned, but also inevitably
impact the legitimate rights of the constituency from where the
Member had been elected.
72. In Lawrence Joseph Harnett35 the question was about the
challenge to the Standing Order which provided as follows : (AC pp.
473-74)
" 'Whenever it shall have been ruled or decided (whether before
or after the approval of this Standing Order) that the House may not
proceed on a matter which has been initiated in the House affecting
the alleged misconduct of a Member, because thereby the said
Member may be prejudiced in a criminal trial then pending on
charges founded on such misconduct the House may suspend such
Member from the service of the House until the verdict of the jury
has been returned, or until it is further ordered.' "
This Standing Order was approved by the Governor. In that context, the
Privy Council observed that it seems impossible for the Court to declare
that the House was so wrong in its judgment, and the Standing Order
and the resolution founded upon it so foreign to the purpose
contemplated by the Act, so as to declare the proceedings against the
Member invalid. In other words, the Privy Council was considering a
written Standing Order and its efficacy.
73. In the present case, the House has already adopted the Rules for
conduct of its business and Rule 53 of the Rules expressly provides for
the mechanism regarding suspension of its Member. Indubitably, the
source of powers and privileges of Legislatures in India is derived from
Article 105(3) in case of Parliament and Article 194(3) concerning the
State Legislature. In the absence of a law to define such powers and
privileges, as of now, it can only exercise those powers as existed in the
House of Commons of the Parliament of United Kingdom at the
commencement of the Constitution.
74. In the celebrated treatise of Sir Thomas Erskine May 36 dealing
with the parliamentary privileges, it is noted as follows:
"if for a subsequent occasion, in default of an order by the House
that the suspension of the Member shall terminate when the House
orders that it shall do so, the suspension shall be for the remainder
of the Session".
(emphasis supplied)
He then noted that the first or subsequent occasion would mean the
first or the subsequent occasion in the same session.
75. Further, the position as obtained in the United Kingdom at the
relevant time to suspend its members was governed by the House of
Commons Standing Order Relative to Public Business, 1948. The
relevant Standing Order is No. 22 (1 to 4) as reproduced hereunder:
"22. Order in debate.-(1) Whenever a Member shall have been
named by Mr Speaker or by the Chairman, immediately after the
commission of the offence of disregarding the authority of the chair,
or of persistently and wilfully obstructing the business of the House
by abusing the rules of the House, or otherwise, then, if the offence
has been committed by such Member in the House, Mr Speaker shall
forthwith put the question, on a motion being made, no amendment,
adjournment, or debate being allowed, "That such Member be
suspended from the service of the House"; and if the offence has
been committed in a committee of the whole House, the chairman
shall forthwith suspend the proceedings of the committee and report
the circumstances to the House; and Mr Speaker shall on a motion
being made forthwith put the same question, no amendment,
adjournment, or debate being allowed, as if the offence had been
committed in the House itself.
(2) If any Member be suspended under this order, his suspension
on the first occasion shall continue until the fifth day, and on the
second occasion until the twentieth day, on which the House shall sit
after the day on which he was suspended, but on any subsequent
occasion until the House shall resolve that the suspension of such
Member do terminate.
(3) Not more than one Member shall be named at the same time,
unless two or more members, present together, have jointly
disregarded the authority of the chair.
(4) If a Member, or two or more Members acting jointly, who have
been suspended under this order from the service of the House, shall
refuse to obey the direction of Mr Speaker, when severally
summoned under Mr Speaker's orders by the Serjeant at Arms to
obey such direction, Mr Speaker shall call the attention of the House
to the fact that recourse to force is necessary in order to compel
obedience to his direction, and the Member or Members named by
him as having refused to obey his direction
shall thereupon and without any further question being put be
suspended from the service of the House during the remainder of the
session."
76. On conjoint reading of sub-clauses (2) and (4) of the above-
cited Standing Order No. 22, it is seen that suspension of a Member on
the first occasion can be for a period of five days or the remainder of
the session whichever is earlier. Even for the second occasion the
period of suspension is only twenty days or remainder of the Session,
whichever is earlier. On any subsequent occasion the period of
suspension shall be until the House shall resolve that the suspension of
such Member do terminate.
77. The Orissa High Court in Sushanta Kumar Chand" had occasion
to deal with a case of warrant issued by the Speaker of the Assembly to
detain the contemnor for seven days' simple imprisonment. It was
urged that as the unexpired period of sentence was beyond the term of
the Session of the House, the same had lapsed in law. The High Court
answered the challenge in favour of the petitioners after noticing
passage from Sir Thomas Erskine May and Halsbury's Laws of England.
Sir Thomas Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice relied upon in that
"5.
'Persons committed by the Commons, if not sooner
discharged by the House, are immediately released from their
confinement on a prorogation, whether they have paid the fees or
not. If they were held longer in custody, they would be discharged
by the courts upon a writ of habeas corpus.' "
78. And Halsbury's Law of England relied upon in the same decision
"9. 'The Lords claim to have power to commit an offender for a
specified period even beyond the period of a session. This course was
also formerly pursued by the Commons but was later abandoned;
and it would now seem that they no longer have power to keep
offenders in prison beyond the period of session
"
(emphasis supplied)
79. The rationale for limiting all remedies for breach of privilege, as
a rule, to a Session in which the House takes action for such breach is
37
the effect of prorogation. According to Erskine May's Treatise* it is
stated as under:
"The effect of a prorogation is at once to suspend all business
until Parliament shall be summoned again. Not only are the sittings
of Parliament at an end, but all proceedings pending at the time are
quashed, except impeachments by the Commons, and appeals
before the House of Lords. Every bill must therefore be renewed after
a prorogation, as if it had never been introduced."
(emphasis supplied)
80. A priori, if the legislature intended to depart from mechanism
predicated in Rule 53, it ought to have expressly provided for that
dispensation. If it had done that by a law or in the form of Rules framed
under Article 208 of the Constitution, the legality and constitutionality
thereof could have been tested. Suffice it to note, in absence thereof, it
would inevitably be exercise of power without an express grant in that
regard. In such a case, the exercise of power can only be implied or
inherent and limited to the logic of general necessity by way of self-
protective or self-defensive action reasonably necessary for proper
exercise of the functions of the House during the ongoing Session.
Anything in excess then for a day or the remainder of the ongoing
Session, would not be necessary much less rational exercise of inherent
power of the Assembly. Even, Rule 53 bestows authority in the Speaker
to take action against the Member only for ensuring orderly functioning
of the House. Same logic must apply to the exercise of inherent limited
power by the House, even if it may not be de facto under Rule 53.
81. Be it noted, had it been a case of expulsion of the Member by
the House in terms of Section 151-A of the 1951 Act, the Election
Commission would move into action and rather be obliged to take steps
not later than six months to fill in the vacancy so caused subject to the
situation referred to in the proviso therein - so that the constituency
could be duly represented in the House at the earliest opportunity.
Concededly, the Legislative Assembly is a conglomeration of members
chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the State
(as per Article 170). That presupposes that all territorial constituencies
must be duly represented in the Assembly in continuum. In any case,
their representation cannot be deprived for longer period than
necessary for the orderly functioning of the House during the Session.
For that reason, the statutory mandate postulated vide parliamentary
law (which must be regarded as higher law and acts as a limitation
upon the legislature as well, as expounded in Sub-Committee on
Judicial Accountability the constituency cannot be denied
representation in the House beyond a limited period due to fortuitous
situation.
82. Moreover, the expelled Member would be free to contest the mid
-term election and get re-elected from the same constituency. In that,
the Member does not incur any disqualification due to expulsion or even
removal by the House. In case of suspension beyond the period of
remainder of the Session or sixty days or six months, as the case may
be, even though is not a case of disqualification incurred by the
Member, it would entail in undue deprivation of the constituency to be
represented in the House by their duly elected representative. It is,
therefore, a drastic measure trenching upon imposing penalty more
than disciplinary or corrective measure, beyond the limited inherent
powers of the House.
83. The learned counsel for the respondents had invited our
attention to the judgments 14, 15 of the Gujarat High Court wherein it
had been held that the Rules framed under Article 208 of the
Constitution are neither statutory nor binding on the Legislative
Assembly. Those decisions have not taken note of the efficacy of the
observations made by the Constitution Bench of this Court in M.S.M.
Sharma 8 as back as in 1959 - that the Rules framed under Article 208
of the Constitution would have the effect of procedure established by
law for the purpose of Article 21 of the Constitution and which dictum
has been consistently followed in subsequent decisions including by the
Constitution Bench which dealt with Raja Ram Pal³. Accordingly, the
decisions pressed into service by the respondents cannot take the
matter any further. The respondents have relied upon other decisions
including of this Court which, however, has had no occasion to deal
with the legality and efficacy of direction or order issued by the House
such as vide impugned resolution of suspending duly elected members
for a period of one year instead of maximum period of remainder of the
same Session. Indeed, the decision of the Madras High Court in V.C.
Chandhira Kumar19 held the resolution of the Assembly reducing the
original period of one year to six months as valid, however, for the view
that we have taken, the said decision will be of no avail.
84. Resultantly, we have no hesitation in concluding that the
impugned resolution suffers from the vice of being unconstitutional,
grossly illegal and irrational to the extent of period of suspension
beyond the remainder of the (ongoing) Session concerned. Further, it is
not a case of mere procedural irregularity committed by the legislature
within the meaning of Article 212(1) of the Constitution.
85. Although the learned counsel appearing for the parties had
raised diverse contentions, we need not dilate further having opined
that in exercise of inherent power of the House, the suspension of the
members could not have, in any case, exceeded the remainder period
of the ongoing Session. The Session concerned having concluded long
back in July 2021, the petitions ought to succeed and could be
disposed of with a declaration that suspension beyond the remainder of
the ongoing Session in which the resolution was passed, is nullity,
unconstitutional and grossly illegal and irrational. The same cannot be
given effect to beyond the remainder period of the Session concerned
and must be regarded as non est in the eye of the law beyond that
period. For that reason, it is unnecessary for us to dilate on other
aspects of the matter. Thus, we do not wish to examine the same.
Epilogue
86. It is unnecessary to underscore that Parliament as well as the
State Legislative Assembly are regarded as sacred places, just as the
judicature as temple of justice. As a matter of fact, the first place where
justice is dispensed to the common man is Parliament/Legislative
Assembly albeit by a democratic process. It is a place where policies
and laws are propounded for governing the citizenry. It is here that the
entire range of activities concerning the masses until the last mile, are
discussed and their destinies are shaped. That, in itself, is the process
of dispensing justice to the citizens of this country. These are places
where robust and dispassionate debates and discussion inspired by the
highest traditions of truth and righteousness ought to take place for
resolving the burning issues confronting the nation/State and for
dispensing justice - political, social and economic. The happenings in
the House is reflection of the contemporary societal fabric. The
behavioural pattern of the society is manifested or mirrored in the
thought process and actions of the members of the House during the
debates. It is in public domain (through print, electronic and social
media) that the Members of Parliament or Assembly/Council of the
State, spend much of the time in a hostile atmosphere.
87. Parliament/Legislative Assembly are becoming more and more
intransigent place. The philosophical tenet, one must agree to disagree
is becoming a seldom scene or a rarity during the debates. It has
become common to hear that the House could not complete its usual
scheduled business and most of the time had been spent in jeering and
personal attacks against each other instead of erudite constructive and
educative debates consistent with the highest tradition of the august
body. This is the popular sentiment gaining ground amongst the
common man. It is disheartening for the observers. They earnestly feel
that it is high time that corrective steps are taken by all concerned and
the elected representatives would do enough to restore the glory and
the standard of intellectual debates of the highest order, as have been
chronicled of their predecessors. That legacy should become more
prominent than the rumpus caused very often.
88. Aggression during the debates has no place in the setting of
country governed by the Rule of Law. Even a complex issue needs to be
resolved in a congenial atmosphere by observing collegiality and
showing full respect and deference towards each other. They ought to
ensure optimum utilisation of quality time of the House, which is very
precious, and is the need of the hour especially when we the people of
India, that is, Bharat, take credit of being the oldest civilisation on the
planet and also being the world's largest democracy (demographically).
89. For becoming world leaders and self-dependent/reliant, quality
of debates in the House ought to be of the highest order and directed
towards intrinsic constitutional and native issues confronting the
common man of the nation/States, who are at the crossroad of semi-
sesquicentennial or may we say platinum or diamond jubilee year on
completion of 75 years post-Independence. Being House of respected
and honourable members, who are emulated by their ardent followers
and elected from their respective
constituency, they are expected to show statesmanship and not
brinkmanship. In the House, their goal is and must be one - so as to
ensure the welfare and happiness of we the people of this nation.
90. In any case, there can be no place for disorderly conduct in the
House much less "grossly disorderly". Such conduct must be dealt with
sternly for ensuring orderly functioning of the House. But, that action
must be constitutional, legal, rational and as per the procedure
established by law. This case has thrown up an occasion for all
concerned to ponder over the need to evolve and adhere to good
practices befitting the august body; and appropriately denounce and
discourage proponents of undemocratic activities in the House, by
democratically elected representatives. We say no more.
Conclusion
91. In conclusion, we have no hesitation in allowing these writ
petitions and to declare that the impugned resolution directing
suspension of the petitioners beyond the period of the remainder of the
Monsoon Session concerned held in July 2021 is non est in the eye of
the law, nullity, unconstitutional, substantively illegal and irrational.
The impugned resolution is, thus, declared to be ineffective in law,
insofar as the period beyond the remainder of the stated Session in
which the resolution came to be passed.
Order
92. As a result of the stated declaration, the petitioners are entitled
for all consequential benefits of being Members of the Legislative
Assembly, on and after the expiry of the period of the remainder of the
Session concerned in July 2021. The writ petitions are allowed in the
above terms. No order as to costs.
Postscript
93. While parting, we need to express a word of appreciation for the
able assistance given by the learned counsel appearing for the parties
concerned enabling us to deal with the complex issues on hand. That
they did despite the handicaps and uncertainty of online interaction in
virtual Court hearing. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
+
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India [Allowed]
1
2
3
4
"151-A. Time-limit for filling vacancies referred to in Sections 147, 149, 150 and 151.
-Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 147, Section 149, Section 150 and Section
151, a bye-election for filling any vacancy referred to in any of the said sections shall be held
within a period of six months from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply if -
(a) the remainder of the term of a Member in relation to a vacancy is less than one year; or
(b) the Election Commission in consultation with the Central Government certifies that it is
difficult to hold the bye-election within the said period."
5
"110. Government Resolutions.-(1) The provisions of Rule 106 shall not apply to
resolutions of which notice is given by a Minister or the Advocate General.
(2) Seven days' notice shall be necessary in respect of such resolutions."
(emphasis supplied)
1
6
Barton V. Taylor, (1886) LR 11 AC 197 (PC)
7
Ori 111 (Division Bench)
8
M.S.M. Sharma V. Sri Krishna Sinha, AIR 1959 SC 395, paras 25, 26, 28 and 29 (Five-Judge
Bench)
9
Powers, Privileges & Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964, AIR 1965 SC 745, paras 31, 32, 35, 36, 39 to 41, 56, 60, 61, 124 and 125 (Seven-
Judge Bench)
10
12 "57. Suspension of rules.-Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move
that any rule may be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House;
and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended for the time being."
13
'58. General Powers of Speaker.-All matters not specifically provided for in these rules
and all questions relating to the detailed working of these Rules shall be regulated in such
manner as the Speaker may, from time to time direct."
(emphasis supplied)
14
(2007) 48 (4) GLR 2998 (Single-Judge Bench)
15
(1970) 11 GLR 729, paras 14 to 16 (Division Bench)
16
Bench)
17
(Full Bench)
92, 101, 108 to 110 and 160
19
4.19 to 4.30 : (2013) 6 CTC 506, paras 4.19 to 4.30 (Division Bench)
9
Powers, Privileges & Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964, AIR 1965 SC 745, paras 31, 34, 35 and 39 to 41
20
21
3
to 453, 530, 531, 534, 536, 598 and 696 to 705
11
22 Out of total 98-100 days in a year in three Sessions, namely, Budget, Monsoon and Winter
altogether.
24
Bench)
25
Bradlaugh V. Gossett, (1884) LR 12 QBD 271 : 50 LT 620
26
9
Powers, Privileges & Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964, AIR 1965 SC 745
27
"29. Seeing that the present proceedings have been initiated on a petition under Article 32
of the Constitution and as the petitioner may not be entitled, for reasons stated above, to
avail himself of Article 19(1)(a) to support this application, learned advocate for the
petitioner falls back upon Article 21 and contends that the proceedings before the Committee
of Privileges threaten to deprive him of personal liberty otherwise than in accordance with
procedure established by law. The Legislative Assembly claims that under Article 194(3) it
has all the powers, privileges and immunities enjoyed by the British House of Commons at the
commencement of our Constitution. If it has those powers, privileges and immunities, then it
can certainly enforce the same, as the House of Commons can do. Article 194(3) confers on
the Legislative Assembly those powers, privileges and immunities and Article 208 confers
power on it to frame rules. The Bihar Legislative Assembly has framed rules in exercise of its
powers under that Article. It follows, therefore, that Article 194(3) read with the rules so
framed has laid down the procedure for enforcing its powers, privileges and immunities. If,
therefore, the Legislative Assembly has the powers, privileges and immunities of the House
of Commons and if the petitioner is eventually deprived of his personal liberty as a result of
the proceedings before the Committee of Privileges, such deprivation will be in accordance
with procedure established by law and the petitioner cannot complain of the breach, actual
or threatened, of his Fundamental Right under Article 21." (M.S.M. Sharma case, AIR pp. 410
-11)
(emphasis supplied)
28 Ratilal Bhanji Mithani V. Collector of Customs, (1967) 3 SCR 926 at p. 929 : AIR 1967 SC
1639 at p. 1641
451-52, para 42 (Five-Judge Bench)
29 11th Edn.
30
6th Edn.
31
8th Edn.
11
32
Some of the functions of the elected representative in the House/Assembly (taken from
the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Rules) would indicate that the Member would not be
able to take part in following matters, if suspended:
(a) Moving of a motion which requires decision by the Assembly, including by Division (Rules
23, 40, 41);
(b) Taking part in a debate on a motion including speeches (Rules 33, 34);
(c) Asking Questions on Statements made by Ministers (Rule 47);
(d) Making of personal explanations (Rule 48);
(e) Questions on matters of public concern from Ministers (Rule 68);
(f) Short Notice questions for immediate reply on questions of urgent nature (Rule 86);
(g) Private Member bills (Rule 111);
(h) Discussions on matters of sufficient public importance (Rule 94);
(i) No confidence motions (Rule 95);
(j) Adjournment motions (Rule 97);
(k) Participation as members of Committees, including the Committee for consideration of
matters of public importance, Business Advisory Committee, Public Accounts Committee,
Committee on Estimates, etc. (Part XV of the Rules).
33
Edward Kielley V. William Carson, (1842) 4 Moo PC 63 : 13 ER 225
34 Thomas William Doyle V. George Charles Falconer, (1866) LR 1 PC 328 : 36 LJPC 33 : 15
WR 366
35 Lawrence Joseph Harnett V. William Patrick Crick, 1908 AC 470 : 78 LJPC 38 : 99 LT 601
(PC)
34 Thomas William Doyle V. George Charles Falconer, (1866) LR 1 PC 328 at p. 340 : 36 LJPC
33 : 15 WR 366
36
The Law, Privileges Proceedings and Usage of Parliament, Fifteenth (1950) Edn. (See
Chapter VII under the heading "Proceedings upon the naming of a Member" at pp. 451-452.)
37
The Law, Privileges Proceedings and Usage of Parliament, Fifteenth (1950) Edn. at p. 32
under the heading "Effect of a Prorogation".
38
Section 151-A of the 1951 Act.