In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD AND A.S. BOPANNA, JJ.)
NEIL AURELIO NUNES (OBC RESERVATION) AND
OTHERS
Petitioners;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Writ Petitions (C) No. 961 of 2021- with Nos. 967, 1002, 1021 and
1105 of 2021, decided on January 20, 2022
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - All-India quota (AIQ)
seats in undergraduate and postgraduate seats in medical courses in State-
run institutions - Reservation within AIQ seats for OBCs (non-creamy
layer) by Noti. dt. 29-7-2021, held, valid - Rationale for, extensively
explained
B. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation, held, it is well-settled now, is not an exception to the
principle of equality - Supreme Court has transformed the equality
jurisprudence in India from formal equality to substantial equality/real or
factual equality - Thus, special provisions (like reservation) under Arts. 15
(4) and 16(4) are not an exception to the principle of equality under Arts.
14, 15(1) and 16(1) but a restatement of the right to equality - Historical
disadvantages suffered by certain communities have created structural
inequalities - Special provisions can ameliorate these structural inequalities
and provide an equitable setting to level up the weaker sections so that real
or factual equality can be ensured and does not remain illusory
C. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - Identification of backward groups or classes, held,
depends on common group characteristics of backwardness and not on
characteristics of a few individuals who might not possess these
characteristics of backwardness
- To identify groups who are backward, certain common characteristics
of backwardness are referred to - Allegedly, some individual members of
an identified group, may not have the characteristics of backwardness -
Conversely, some individual members of a non-identified group may
possess the characteristics of backwardness - However, this does not
change the underlying rationale of the reservation policy that seeks to
remedy the structural barriers that disadvantaged groups face -
The
individual difference may be a result of privilege, fortune, or circumstances
but it cannot be used to negate the role of reservation in remedying the
structural disadvantage that certain groups suffer
D. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - "Merit" - What is - Merit and reservation are not
antithetical - Privileges and advantages enjoyed by forward class
candidates vis-à-vis absence thereof in lives of backward class candidates -
Relationship between merit and reservation - Role of special provisions
such reservation in providing a level playing field to unequals - Explained in
detail
- An open competitive exam may ensure formal equality where
everyone has an equal opportunity to participate - But it ignores the
advantages with which the forward classes start and the disadvantages of
backward classes - Backward classes are deprived of the availability of and
access to educational facilities - A combination of family habitus,
community linkages and inherited skills work to the advantage of individuals
of forward classes, which is then classified as "merit" reproducing and
reaffirming social hierarchies - Special provisions (like reservation) enable
disadvantaged classes to equalise their inherited disadvantages with the
inherited privileges of forward classes
- There is no doubt that performance in competitive examination or
admission in higher educational institutions does require a great degree of
hard work and dedication but it is necessary to understand that "merit" is
not solely of one's own making - Scoring high marks in examination is not
the only factor that reflects competence and merit - The propriety of
actions and dedication to public service should also be seen as markers of
merit, which cannot be assessed in a competitive examination - Equally,
fortitude and resilience required to uplift oneself from conditions of
deprivation is reflective of individual calibre
- Irrespective of the true purport of merit, the selection process for
admission must satisfy the test of equality - If open examinations present
equality of opportunity to candidates to compete, reservations ensure that
the opportunities are distributed in such a way that backward classes are
equally able to benefit from such opportunities which typically evade them
because of structural barriers
- Merit is a social good - It is difficult to accept the narrow definition of
merit (that is, decontextualised individual achievement) - Such a definition
hinders the realisation of substantive equality - The way merit
is
understood should not be limited to individual agency or ability (which in any
event is not solely of one's own doing) but it should be envisioned as a
social good that advances equality because that is the value that our
Constitution espouses - The content of merit cannot be devoid of what we
value in society - Words and Phrases - "Merit"
E. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - Permissibility of, at postgraduate level - Held, there
is no prohibition on reservation for SEBCs and OBCs in PG courses - While
on certain occasions, the Court has remarked that there cannot be any
reservation in superspeciality courses, the Court has never held that
reservations in medical PG courses are impermissible - Reservation in PG
courses to a reasonable extent does not violate the equality clause
- A graduate qualification may provide certain social and economic
mobility, but that by itself does not create parity between forward classes
and backward classes - There cannot be an assertion of overinclusion
where undeserving candidates are said to be benefitting from reservation
because OBC candidates who fall in the creamy layer are excluded from
taking the benefit of reservation - Neither precedents nor the Constitution
prohibit reservation in PG courses
F. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - Purpose of creation of all-India quota (AIQ) - Does
not prohibit reservation within AIQ - Explained in detail
AIQ seats must be filled purely on the basis of merit, cannot be interpreted
to mean that there shall be no reservations in the AIQ seats - Scheme of
AIQ seats was devised to provide domicile free seats in State-run medical
and dental institutions - The reference to merit in para 21 of Pradeep Jain
case must be read with the previous observations made in the said
judgment - While discussing the constitutional validity of domicile-
reservation, it was observed that selection of candidates for admission
based on the all-India open examination would further merit since it would
permit the selection of the "best minds in the country" - References to
"merit" must therefore be read in the context of merit vis-à-vis residence
reservation - The intention of the Court in creating an AIQ was solely to
provide candidates from across the country the opportunity to study in
colleges in other parts of the country as well, owing to the unequal number
of colleges (and opportunities) in different States
G. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - Power and prerogative of Government to provide for
- Fact that permission of the Court was obtained, cannot invalidate the
Noti. dt. 29-7-2021 providing reservation - The Government is not required
to seek permission of Court before providing reservation in AIQ seats or
otherwise, in accordance with law - Providing reservation in the AIQ seats
is a policy decision of the Government, which will be subject to the contours
of judicial review applicable to every reservation policy
H. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Affirmative
action/Reservation - Change in the seat matrix after registration, held, in
present case was not arbitrary and did not invalidate Noti. dt. 29-7-2021 -
Changing the Rules of the Game principle, held, did not apply herein as there
was only a change in seat matrix after registration - No doubt the said
principle would apply if there is a change in selection criteria or the
procedure for selection after the selection process had commenced, which is
not the case herein
- The judgments cited on "changing the rules of the game midway"
referred to changes in the selection criteria or the procedure for selection -
Those cases are distinguishable from the case herein since the impugned
notice did not alter the selection criteria
The impugned notice dated 29-7-2021 provided 27% reservation for OBC (non-
creamy layer) and 10% reservation for Economically Weaker Sections ("EWS") in
the 15% UG and 50% PG seats in all-India quota ("AIQ") in medical courses in
State-run institutions, from the academic year 2021-2022. By an order dated 7-1-
2022, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the OBC reservation
in AIQ seats and posted the challenge to the validity of the EWS criteria for final
hearing in the third week of March, 2022. Providing the reasons for upholding the
permissibility of reservations in the AIQ seats and constitutionality of OBC
reservation in AIQ seats, the Supreme Court
Held :
Scheme of AIQ seats
The scheme of AIQ seats was devised to provide domicile free seats in State-run
medical and dental institutions. Presently, under the AIQ scheme, 15% UG seats
and 50% PG seats in State-run institutions are surrendered by the States to AIQ.
The remaining seats in the State institutions are reserved for candidates domiciled in
the respective States.
(Para 3)
Central Educational Institutions - Reservation scheme
Reservations for Scheduled Caste ("SC") and Scheduled Tribe ("ST") candidates
are permissible in the AIQ seats. The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admissions) Act, 2006 ("the 2006 Act"), which came into effect on 3-1-2007, was
enacted to provide for reservation for students belonging to the SCs, STs and OBCs
in Central educational institutions. The 2006 Act provided that 15% seats shall be
reserved for SCs, 7.5% seats for STs, and 27% seats for OBCs in Central
educational institutions. However, reservation for OBCs was not extended to State
contributed seats for AIQ in State-run institutions.
(Para 5)
Mad 1574, held, affirmed
Saloni Kumari V. DG Health Services, WP (C) No. 596 of 2015 (SC); T.G. Babu V.
referred to
Expert Committee recommendations in granting reservation to OBCs in AIQ
seats
The MH&FW set up an expert committee to determine the modalities of granting
reservation to OBC candidates in AIQ seats in UG and PG courses in State-run
medical colleges within the State of Tamil Nadu from the academic year 2021-
2022. The committee recommended two options in its final report i.e. either State-
specific reservation can be implemented for OBCs in AIQ seats or OBC reservation
can be granted in terms of the provisions of the 2006 Act.
(Para 9)
Issue herein
By its order dated 7-1-2022, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional
validity of the OBC reservation in AIQ medical and dental UG and PG seats. The
constitutionality of the criteria used for the identification of the EWS category is yet
to be decided. However, during the interim period, the Court directed that the
counselling in NEET-PG 2021 and NEET-UG 2021 be conducted by giving effect to
the reservation provided by the Notice dated 29-7-2021, including the 27% OBC
reservation and 10% EWS reservation. The challenge to the validity of the OBC
reservation in AIQ seats is dealt with in this judgment.
(Para 13)
The Court is aware that a writ petition was filed by one S seeking 27% OBC
reservation in AIQ seats in State-run medical institutions on the ground that such
reservation should not be restricted to Central education institutions in terms of the
2006 Act. The claim raised in that petition was of parity. The issue that has been
raised herein is of the validity of the Notification dated 29-7-2021 that provides for
27% OBC reservation in the AIQ seats in UG and PG seats from the academic year
2021-2022. On account of the difference in the nature of the issues raised, the
Court will proceed to rule on the validity of the Notification dated 29-7-2021.
(Para 14)
Merit and Reservation
On behalf of the petitioners, a binary was sought to be created between merit
and reservation, where reservation becomes antithetical to establishing
meritocracy. This is not a novel argument. In the Constituent Assembly, although
there was a debate on the meaning of "backward classes", it was felt that there
must be a provision that enables entry of those communities into administration
since they were deprived of such access in the past and formal equality of
opportunity would not suffice. However, the view that merit or efficiency in service
is distinct from concerns of advancement of backward classes persisted for some
members.
(Paras 19 and 20)
Constituent Assembly Debates also provided a conception of substantive
equality when it was stated that merit of candidates cannot be evaluated through
an open competition without regard to their social positions.
(Para 22)
The debates in Constituent Assembly were limited to reservation in public posts
because reservation in educational institutions was introduced through Constitution
(93rd Amendment) Act, 2005. By said Amendment, Article 15(5) was inserted to
empower the State to make special provisions (including reservation) for the
advancement of socially and educationally backward classes (or the OBCs) relating
to their admission in educational institutions.
(Paras 23 and 4)
Court transformed the equality jurisprudence in India from formal equality
to substantial equality/real or factual equality
&
The Court initially subscribed to the binary of merit and reservation. Articles 14,
15(1) and 16(1) were thought to embody the general principle of formal equality.
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) were understood to be exceptions to this general principle,
advancing the cause of social justice. Initially, the Court sought to balance these
competing imperatives. In such an understanding, merit is equated to formal
equality of opportunity which has to be balanced against the concerns of social
justice through reservation.
(Para 24)
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; T.
Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179; C.A.
Rajendran V. Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507, referred to
The Court in subsequent judgments stated that Article 16(4) is not an exception
but rather a facet of Article 16(1), which seeks to redress the historical
disadvantage suffered by certain communities.
(Para 26)
The Court transformed the equality jurisprudence in India from that of formal
equality to substantive equality; thus, also changing our understanding of
reservations.
(Para 27)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179, dissenting
view of Subba Rao, J. since adopted by subsequent Benches of the Supreme
Court including by the 9-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney case as the correct view,
followed
followed
The Court accepted that the special provisions (including reservation) made for
the benefit of any class are not an exception to the general principle of equality.
Special provisions are a method to ameliorate the structural inequalities that exist in
the society, without which, true or factual equality will remain illusory. While equality
under Article 16(1) is individual-centric, the manner in which it is to be achieved is
through the identification of groups that do not enjoy equal access to certain rights
and entitlements.
(Para 28)
followed
The view that special provisions made for a backward class are not an exception
to the principle of equality was reaffirmed by the nine-Judge Bench in Indra
Supreme Court has observed that the principles applied for interpreting Article 16
are also to be used for the interpretation of Article 15. Thus, Articles 15(4) and 15
(5) are nothing but a restatement of the quarantee of the right to equality
stipulated in Article 15(1).
(Para 32)
Fact that some members of an identified group may not possess the
characteristics of backwardness does not change the underlying rationale
of the reservation policy that seeks to remedy the structural barriers that
disadvantaged groups face
Irrespective of whether Article 16(1) is individual-centric or group-centric, Article
16(4) is crucial to achieve substantive equality that is envisaged under Article 16
(1). Articles 16(4), 15(4) and 15(5) employ group identification as a method
through which substantive equality can be achieved. This may lead to an incongruity
where individual members of an identified group may not be backward or individuals
belonging to the non-identified group may share certain
characteristics of backwardness with members of an identified group. However, this
does not change the underlying rationale of the reservation policy that seeks to
remedy the structural barriers that disadvantaged groups face in advancing in
society. Reservation is one of the measures that is employed to overcome these
barriers. The individual difference may be a result of privilege, fortune, or
circumstances but it cannot be used to negate the role of reservation in remedying
the structural disadvantage that certain groups suffer.
(Para 31)
on
An open competitive exam may ensure formal equality where everyone has
an equal opportunity to participate - But it ignores the advantages with
which the forward classes start and the disadvantages of backward classes
- Special provisions (like reservation) enable such disadvantaged classes
to equalise their inherited disadvantages with the inherited privileges of
forward classes
The binary of merit and reservation has now become superfluous once the
Supreme Court has recognised the principle of substantive equality as the mandate
of Article 14 and as a facet of Articles 15(1) and 16(1). An open competitive exam
may ensure formal equality where everyone has an equal opportunity to
participate. However, widespread inequalities in the availability of and access to
educational facilities will result in the deprivation of certain classes of people who
would be unable to effectively compete in such a system. Special provisions (like
reservation) enable such disadvantaged classes to overcome the barriers thev face
in effectively competing with forward classes and thus ensuring substantive equality.
The privileges that accrue to forward classes are not limited to having access to
quality schooling and access to tutorials and coaching centres to prepare for a
competitive examination but also include their social networks and cultural capital
(communication skills, accent, books or academic accomplishments) that they
inherit from their family. The cultural capital ensures that a child is trained
unconsciously by the familial environment to take up higher education or high posts
commensurate with their family's standing. This works to the disadvantage of
individuals who are first-generation learners and come from communities whose
traditional occupations do not result in the transmission of necessary skills required
to perform well in open examination. They have to put in surplus effort to compete
with their peers from the forward communities. On the other hand, social networks
(based on community linkages) become useful when individuals seek guidance and
advice on how to prepare for examination and advance in their career even if their
immediate family does not have the necessary exposure. Thus, a combination of
family habitus, community linkages and inherited skills work to the advantage of
individuals belonging to certain classes, which is then classified as "merit"
reproducing and reaffirming social hierarchies.
(Para 33)
K.V. Syamprasad: "Merit and caste as cultural capital : Justifying affirmative action
for the underprivileged in Kerala, India", Journal for Critical Education Policy
Studies, Vol. 17, pp. 50-81 (2019), referred to
Apparently neutral systems of examination perpetuate social inequalities.
(Para 34)
Galanter M. : Competing Equalities : Law and the Backward Classes in India
(Oxford University Press, New Delhi 1984); Deshpande S.:"Inclusion versus
excellence : Caste and the framing of fair access in Indian higher education", 40 :
1 South African Review of Sociology 127-147, referred to
Scoring high marks in the examination is not the only factor that reflects
competence and merit - If open examinations present equality of
opportunity to candidates to compete, reservations ensure that the
opportunities are distributed in such a way that Backward Classes are
equally able to benefit from such opportunities which typically evade them
because of structural barriers
There is no doubt that performance in competitive examination or admission in
higher educational institutions does require a great degree of hard work and
dedication but it is necessary to understand that "merit" is not solely of one's own
making. The rhetoric surrounding merit obscures the way in which family, schooling,
fortune and a gift of talents that the society currently values aids in one's
advancement. Thus, the exclusionary standard of merit serves to denigrate the
dignity of those who face barriers in their advancement which are not of their own
making. But the idea of merit based on "scores in an exam" requires deeper
scrutiny. While examinations are a necessary and convenient method of distributing
educational opportunities, marks may not always be the best gauge of individual
merit. Even then marks are often used as a proxy for merit. Individual calibre
transcends performance in an examination. Standardised measures such as
examination results are not the most accurate assessment of the qualitative
difference between candidates.
(Para 35)
Michael Sandel : Tyranny of Merit : What's become of the Common Good (Penguin
Books); Ashwini Deshpande:"Social Justice Through Affirmative Action in India :
An Assessment", in Jeannette Wicks-Lim and Robert Pollin (Eds.) Capitalism on
Trial : Explorations in the Tradition of Thomas Weisskopf (Publisher : Edward
Elgar Publishing Inc., Northampton, MA, 2013), referred to
At best, an examination can only reflect the current competence of an individual
but not the gamut of their potential, capabilities or excellence, which are also
shaped by lived experiences, subsequent training and individual character. The
meaning of "merit" itself cannot be reduced to marks even if it is a convenient way
of distributing educational resources. When examinations claim to be more than
systems of resource allocation, they produce a warped system of ascertaining the
worth of individuals as students or professionals. Additionally, since success in
examinations results in the ascription of high social status as a "meritorious
individual", they often perpetuate and reinforce the existing ascriptive identities of
certain communities as "intellectual" and "competent" by rendering invisible the
social, cultural and economic advantages that increase the probabilities of success.
Thus, the meaning of "merit" needs to be reconceptualised. For instance, if a high-
scoring candidate does not use their talents to perform good actions, it would be
difficult to call them "meritorious" merely because they scored high marks. The
propriety of actions and dedication to public service should also be seen as markers
of merit, which cannot be assessed in a competitive examination. Equally, fortitude
and resilience required to uplift oneself from conditions of deprivation is reflective of
individual calibre.
(Para 37)
Satish Deshpande:"Pas Fail, Distinction : The Examination as a Social Institution",
Marjorie Sykes Memorial Lecture, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer, 3-3-
2010, published by the National Council for Educational Research and Training,
New Delhi, referred to
The surest wayt to legal research!"
Irrespective of the true purport of merit, the selection process for admission
must satisfy the test of equality.
(Para 39)
The Advisory opinion on Minority Schools in Albania, 6-4-1935 publications of the
Court, Series A/B No. 64, p. 19, referred to
There is no constitutional basis to subscribe to the binary of merit and
reservation. If open examinations present equality of opportunity to candidates to
compete, reservations ensure that the opportunities are distributed in such a way
that backward classes are equally able to benefit from such opportunities which
typically evade them because of structural barriers. This is the only manner in which
merit can be a democratising force that equalises inherited disadvantages and
privileges. Otherwise claims of individual merit are nothing but tools of obscuring
inheritances that underlie achievements.
(Para 40)
Merit is a social good
If merit is a social good that must be protected, we must first critically examine
the content of merit. The scores in an exam are not the sole determinant of
excellence or capability. Even if for the sake of argument, it is assumed that scores
do reflect excellence, it is not the only value that is considered as a social good. The
distributive consequences of merit must be looked at. Accordingly, how merit is
assessed should also encapsulate if it mitigates or entrenches inequalities.
(Para 41)
Amartya Sen:"Merit and Justice" in Arrow K.J., et al (Eds.), Meritocracy and
Economic Inequality (Princeton University Press, 2000), referred to
An oppositional paradigm of merit and reservation serves to entrench
inequalities by relegating reserved candidates to the sphere of incompetence, and
diminishing their capabilities. While examinations are a necessary and convenient
method to allocate educational resources, they are not effective markers of merit.
The way we understand merit should not be limited to individual agency or ability
(which in any event is not solely of our own doing) but it should be envisioned as a
social good that advances equality because that is the value that our Constitution
espouses. It is important to note that equality here does not merely have a
redistributive dimension but also includes recognising the worth and dignity of every
individual. The content of merit cannot be devoid of what we value in society. It is
difficult to accept the narrow definition of merit (that is, decontextualised individual
achievement). Such a definition hinders the realisation of substantive equality.
(Para 43)
There is no prohibition for reservation of SEBCs and OBCs in PG courses -
Neither precedents nor the Constitution prohibit reservation in PG courses
Article 15(5) does not make a distinction between UG and PG courses.
(Para 44)
The Constitution enables the State to make special provisions for the
advancement of socially and educationally backward classes for admission to
educational institutions at both the UG and PG levels. While on certain occasions,
the Court has remarked that there cannot be any reservation in superspeciality
courses, the Court has never held that reservations in medical PG courses are
impermissible. Reservation in PG courses to a reasonable extent does not violate
the equality clause.
(Para 45)
It cannot be said that the impact of backwardness simply disappears because a
candidate has a graduate qualification. Indeed, a graduate qualification may provide
certain social and economic mobility, but that by itself does not create parity
between forward classes and backward classes. In any event, there cannot be an
assertion of overinclusion where undeserving candidates are said to be benefitting
from reservation because OBC candidates who fall in the creamy layer are excluded
from taking the benefit of reservation. Thus, there is no prohibition in introducing
reservation for socially and educationally backward classes (or the OBCs) in PG
courses.
(Para 46)
The Court and the AIQ seats
Having traced the evolution of the AIQ in UG and PG medical and dental courses,
the two questions that have to be answered are as follows:
the AIQ seats that were to be filled by an open all-India examination should be
free of reservation for the socially and educationally backward classes, and SC
and ST as enabled by Article 15(4).
(ii) Whether reservation in the AIQ can be provided only pursuant to a
direction of the Court.
(para 66)
The observation of the Court in Pradeep Jain case that AIQ seats must be
filled purely on the basis of merit, cannot be interpreted to mean that there
shall be no reservations in the AIQ seats
The Court in Pradeep Jain case was deciding on the constitutional validity of
reservation based on domicile/residence. Having held that residence-based
reservation is constitutionally valid, the next question that the Supreme Court was
tasked with was adjudicating the quantum of residence-based reservation that
could be permitted. It was held that there cannot be wholesale reservation (that is,
100% reservation). It was observed that a certain percentage of seats must be
filled by open merit by an all-India examination without reservation based on
residence. The Medical Education Review Committee had suggested that 75% of
the seats in a medical college shall be reserved for residents of the State. The
Supreme Court decided that it would be fair to reserve 70% of the seats for
residents of the State. Therefore, 30% of the seats were to be filled through an all-
India examination. This would mean that candidates from all across the country
could compete against the 30% seats available in State-run medical colleges. In this
context, the Supreme Court had observed, "such reservation should in no event
exceed the outer limit of 70% of the total number of open seats after taking into
account other kinds of reservations validly made".
(Para 67)
The observation of the Court that AIQ seats must be filled purely on the basis of
merit, cannot be interpreted to mean that there shall be no reservations in the AIQ
seats. Merit must be socially contextualised and reconceptualised according to its
distributive consequences where it furthers substantive equality in terms of Articles
15(4) and 15(5) of the Constitution. The reference to merit in para 21 of the
observations made in the judgment.
(Para 67)
While discussing the constitutional validity of domicile-reservation, it was
observed that selection of candidates for admission based on the all-India open
examination would further merit since it would permit the selection of the "best
minds in the country". In this context, it was observed that claims that would weigh
with the Supreme Court in justifying the departure from the principle of merit-based
selection are : (i) claim of State interest, where the students by view of their
residence are expected to settle down and serve their State; and (ii) the regions'
claim of backwardness (para 16). Further, it was observed that though
theoretically, admissions in medical colleges should be based on an all-India
examination since it would further merit and would provide equality of opportunity
to candidates across the country, keeping in view the differing levels of social,
economic, and educational development in different areas, factual equality would
not be attained. Therefore, the observation in para 21 of the judgment in Pradeep
examination purely on merit, must be interpreted only with reference to the
discussion made on residence-based reservation and the necessity of an all-India
examination for admission to medical and dental courses. References to "merit"
must therefore be read in the context of merit vis-à-vis residence reservation. This
is further evident from the observation in para 21 of the said judgment.
(Para 68)
The Bench thought it fit that admission through an all-India entrance examination
would further merit, enabling the best minds all over the country to study medicine.
(Para 69)
Subsequent judgments further clarified that the Union Government and the
Medical Council for India had not taken any initiative to conduct an all-India entrance
examination for admissions to the AIQ seats. The suggestion that admission to the
AIQ could be made based on the marks obtained in the qualifying examination held
by different States or/and universities was rejected on the ground that the standard
of assessment would not be uniform. It is thus evident that the intention of the
Court in Pradeep Jain case in creating an AIQ was solely to provide candidates from
across the country the opportunity to study medicine in colleges in other parts of
the country as well, owing to the unequal number of medical colleges (and
opportunities) in different States.
(Para 70)
referred to
The Union Government's power to introduce reservation in AIQ seats does
not require the permission of the Court
The petitioners argued that the Union Government should have filed an
application before the Court before notifying reservations in the AIQ since the AIQ
scheme is a creation of the Court. The said argument cannot be accepted.
(Para 75)
a
submission to the Court of its intention to provide reservations in the AIQ for the
SC and ST candidates since until then in view of the confusion on demarcation of
the seat matrix, there was no clarity on whether reservations could be provided
in the AIQ. The Court clarified that reservations are permissible in the AIQ seats.
Therefore, the order in Abhay Nath case was only clarificatory in view of the earlier
to mean that the Union of India sought the permission of the Court before providing
reservation would amount to aiding an interpretation that would foster judicial
overreach. Therefore, the argument that the Union Government should have
approached the Court before notifying the reservations for the OBC and EWS
categories in the AIQ seats is erroneous.
(Para 75)
relied on
In Abhay Nath case, the Union Government had apprised the Supreme Court of
its decision to provide reservation for the SC and ST categories in the AIQ. It had
then, as a policy decision, decided to only provide reservation for the SC and ST
categories. Parliament enacted the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admission) Act, 2006 in view of the enabling provision in Article 15(5). Section 3
stipulates that there shall be 15% reservation for the SC, 7.5% reservation for the
ST, and 27% reservation for the OBC category in Central educational institutions. A
constitutional validity of 27% reservation for the OBC category provided under the
2006 Act. Though the 2006 Act would not be applicable to the seats earmarked for
AIQ in State-run institutions since it would not fall within the definition of a Central
educational institution under the Act, the Union of India in view of Article 15(5) has
the power to provide reservations for OBCs in the AIQ seats. It is not tenable for
the States to provide reservation in the AIQ seats since these seats have been
"surrendered" to the Centre. It would also lead to the anomaly highlighted in Dinesh
different States differ, which would lead to an unequal percentage of seats available
in the AIQ in different States. This is also coupled with the fact that the SC, ST and
OBC lists are not uniform across States. Thus, it is the Union Government's
prerogative to introduce reservation in AIQ seats.
(Para 76)
Changing the Rules of the Game principle will not apply herein
The impugned notice providing reservation for OBC and EWS categories in the
AIQ was issued on 29-7-2021, after the registration for the examination had closed
on 18-4-2021. It is the contention of the petitioners that the rules of the
examination could have only been changed before the last date for registration. The
petitioners argue that the candidates registered for the exam having a particular
seat matrix in mind and that the change in the seat matrix after registration would
be arbitrary.
(Para 77)
The impugned notice providing reservation for the OBC and EWS categories in
the AIQ seats was issued after the registration had closed but before the exam was
conducted. Thus, it would not amount to altering the rules of the game for the
reasons given below.
(Para 84)
The judgments cited by the counsel for the petitioner on "changing the rules of
the game midway" referred to changes in the selection criteria or the procedure for
selection. Those cases are distinguishable from the case herein since the impugned
notice did not alter the selection criteria.
(Para 84.1)
(L&S) 720, summarised and distinguished
The judgments referred to applied the principle of not changing the rules of the
game midway after the selection process (of exams and interviews) was
completed.
(Para 84.2)
distinguished
Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin specifies that the reservation applicable
would be notified by the counselling authority before the beginning of the counselling
applying for NEET-PG are not provided any information on the distribution of the
seat matrix. Such information is provided by the counselling authority only before
the counselling session is to begin.
(Para 84.3)
Mysore, AIR 1965 SC 1293; Tej Prakash Pathak V. Rajasthan High Court, (2013)
Conclusions - Reservation for OBCs in AIQ seats, valid
The reservation for OBC candidates in the AIQ seats for UG and PG medical and
dental courses is constitutionally valid for the following reasons:
Substantive equality
Articles 15(4) and 15(5) of the Constitution are not an exception to Article 15
(1), which itself sets out the principle of substantive equality (including the
recognition of existing inequalities). Thus, Articles 15(4) and 15(5) become a
restatement of a particular facet of the rule of substantive equality that has been
set out in Article 15(1).
(Para 85.1)
Merit
Merit cannot be reduced to narrow definitions of performance in an open
competitive examination which only provides formal equality of opportunity.
Competitive examinations assess basic current competency to allocate educational
resources but are not reflective of excellence, capabilities and potential of an
individual which are also shaped by lived experiences, subsequent training and
individual character. Crucially, open competitive examinations do not reflect the
social, economic and cultural advantage that accrues to certain classes and
contributes to their success in such examinations.
(Para 85.2)
High scores in an examination are not a proxy for merit. Merit should be socially
contextualised and reconceptualised as an instrument that advances social goods
like equality that we as a society value. In such a context, reservation is not at
odds with merit but furthers its distributive consequences.
(Para 85.3)
Group identification
Articles 15(4) and 15(5) employ group identification as a method through which
substantive equality can be achieved. This may lead to an incongruity where certain
individual members of an identified group that is being given reservation may not be
backward or individuals belonging to the non-identified group may share certain
characteristics of backwardness with members of an identified group.
The individual difference may be a result of privilege, fortune, or circumstances but it
cannot be used to negate the role of reservation in remedying the structural
disadvantage that certain groups suffer.
(Para 85.4)
Reservation in AIQ seats is permissible
The scheme of AIQ was devised to allot seats in State-run medical and dental
institutions in which students from across the country could compete. The
observations in Pradeep Jain case that the AIQ seats must be filled by merit, must
be read limited to merit vis-à-vis residence reservation. Reservation in AIQ seats is
not impermissible.
(Para 85.5)
The total seats demarcated for AIQ shall be determined without excluding
reservation. It does not mean that there should be no reservation in AIQ seats.
(Para 85.7)
point
Reservation in AIQ seats is a policy decision
The Union Government is not required to seek the permission of the Court
before providing reservation in AIQ seats. Providing reservation in the AIQ seats is a
policy decision of the Government, which will be subject to the contours of judicial
review similar to every reservation policy.
(Para 85.6)
distinguished
Plea based on Rules of the Game, not tenable
Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin specifies that the reservation applicable to
NEET-PG would be notified by the counselling authority before the beginning of the
counselling process. Therefore, the candidates while applying for NEET-PG are not
provided any information on the distribution of seat matrix. Such information is
provided by the counselling authority only before the counselling session is to begin.
It thus cannot be argued that the rules of the game were set when the registration
for the examination closed.
(Para 85.8)
The challenge to the constitutional validity of OBC reservation in AIQ seats
introduced through the Notice dated 29-7-2021 is rejected in view of the above
discussion.
(Para 86)
Pending application(s), if any, relating to the issue of OBC reservation
implemented through the Notice dated 29-7-2021 stand disposed of.
(Para 87)
partly overruled
SS-D/68570/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Arvind P. Datar, Shyam Divan and P. Wilson, Senior Advocates
[Subodh S. Patil (Advocate-on-Record), Vivek Singh (Advocate-on-
Record), Ramesh Allanki, Dr Charu Mathur (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Tanvi, Sanjay Kr. Dubey, Rahul Unnikrishnan and Malak Bhatt,
Advocates], for the Petitioners;
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor
General, V. Krishnamurthy, Additional Advocate General, Maninder
Singh and A. Mariarputham, Senior Advocates [Gurmeet Singh Makker
(Advocate-on-Record), Gaurav Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Kirtman
Singh, Waize Ali Noor, Dhawal Mohan, Prateek Bhatia, Ms Srirupa Nag,
Taha Yasin, Amrish Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), R. Nedumaran
(Advocate-on-Record), Dr Joseph Aristotle S. (Advocate-on-Record),
V.K. Biju (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Ria Sachthey, Chetanya Singh,
Amlendu Kr. Akhilesh Kr. Jha, Shaji George, Ms Vijay Laxmi, Ms
Archana Pathak Dave (Advocate-on-Record), Kumar Prashant, Ms Vanya
Gupta, Avnish Dave, Parmod Kr. Vishnoi, Ms Himanshi Shakya,
Devashish Bharuka (Advocate-on-Record), Mithu Jain (Advocate-on -
Record), Subodh S. Patil (Advocate-on-Record), Shashank Ratnoo,
Vikram Hegde (Advocate-on-Record) and Shantanu Lakhotia,
Advocates], for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
India
21d
India
17e-f, 21e-f
61b-c, 61g-h
State of T.N. V. Union of India
20b-c
of Maharashtra
34c-d
Kazhagam V. Rajesh Bhushan (partly overruled)
21a, 21a-b
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam V. Union of India
21b,25d
India
19b, 19c
Kazhagam V. Union of India
18f, 18f-g
35b-c, 40e
Union of India
61d-e
Prakash Pathak V. Rajasthan High Court
60d-e, 60f
Prakash V. State of Haryana
24e, 52e, 52f-g, 53a
18c-d, 22d, 24a, 51a-b,
University of Delhi
51b, 52f, 52f-g, 53a-b,
57e, 57e, 57f-g, 57g,
58a, 58b, 63b, 63d-e
V. K. Jayakumar
22d-e, 50e, 50f-g, 57b
Thakur V. Union of India
58c-d
Manjusree V. State of A.P.
59c, 60a, 60b, 60g-h
Thakur (8) V. Union of India
24g
Umrao Singh V. Punjabi University
60d
49f, 51a-b, 52a, 52a-b,
Union of India (partly overruled)
52d, 52d-e, 57e-f, 58a,
63d, 63d-e
Union of India
49g
Chaudri V. Union of India
49e, 52a
R. Rajeshwaran
50g-h, 57b, 57b-c
V. AIIMS
41d-e
Maharashtra SRTC V. Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve
60b-c
Srivastava V. State of M.P.
22f, 23c, 25f, 41d, 61c-d
1, Indra Sawhney V. Union of India
34c-d
Nehru Medical College
C, 48e, 49e-f, 50g-h,
51f, 56g, 57c, 57f, 58d-
e, 63c-d, 63d
Nehru Medical College
46b-c, 46f-g, 47b-c,
48b-c, 51c-d, 56a, 56c,
56e-f, 63c-d
17g-h, 22b, 22d, 22d-e,
22e, 24d, 24e, 25c,
26a-b, 37d, 38b-c, 41d,
42b-c, 42c, 42e-f, 43b-
C, 43e-f, 44g-h, 45a-b,
45c, 45f-g, 46c, 47b-c,
47f-g, 49d, 49d-e, 51b-
C, 53d-e, 53e-f, 54a-b,
54d, 55b, 55c-d, 56b,
56c, 57f-g, 63a, 63a-b,
63c-d
India
37e-f, 39c-d, 53f
of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas
b, 32e-f, 34a, 39f
Pradip Tandon
42c-d
of Haryana V. Subash Chander Marwaha
39a-b
College Society V. State of Gujarat
39a-b
Nookavarapu Kanakadurga Devi V. Kakatiya
Medical College
42c-d
37. AIR 1965 SC 1293, C. Channabasavaih V. State
of Mysore
61a
38. (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179, C.A.
Rajendran V. Union of India
29b-c
39. (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507, T.
Devadasan V. Union of India
29b-c
40. (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179, T.
Devadasan V. Union of India
29c
41. 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, M.R.
Balaji V. State of Mysore
28d-e, 28e, 28e-f, 28f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J. - This judgment has been divided into the
following sections to facilitate analysis:
INDEX
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
Factual background
17
B.
Pendency of the writ petition instituted by Saloni
21
Kumari
C.
Submissions of counsel
22
D.
Analysis
26
D.1.
The Merit of Reservation
26
D.2.
The Court and the AIQ seats
42
D.3.
The Executive's power to introduce
58
reservation in AIQ seats
D.4.
Changing the Rules of the Game
59
E.
Conclusion
62
A. Factual background
2. These writ petitions challenge the reservation for Other Backward
Classes ("OBC") and the Economically Weaker Section ("EWS") in the
all-India quota ("AIQ") seats in the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance
Test examination ("NEET") for undergraduate ("UG") and postgraduate
("PG") medical courses. The Directorate General of Health Services in
the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ("MH&FW") issued a
notice on 29-7-2021 providing 27% reservation for OBC (non-creamy
layer) and 10% reservation for EWS in the 15% UG and 50% PG seats
in AIQ from the academic year 2021-2022. By an order dated 7-1-
2022¹, a two-Judge Bench of this Court upheld the constitutional
validity of the OBC reservation in AIQ seats and posted the challenge to
the validity of the EWS criteria for final hearing in the third week of
March, 2022. This judgment provides reasons for upholding the
permissibility of reservations in the AIQ seats and constitutionality of
OBC reservation in AIQ seats.
3. Some of the salient facts that have led to the implementation of
OBC reservation in AIQ seats are being adverted to for setting out the
broad contours of the controversy. While we have discussed in detail
the history of the AIQ and the evolution of an all-India common
entrance examination in Section D-2, it is sufficient to highlight that
the scheme of AIQ seats was devised by this Court in Pradeep Jain V.
Union of India² to provide domicile free seats in State-run medical and
dental institutions. The AIQ scheme was further developed by this
Court in Dinesh Kumar (1) V. Motilal Nehru Medical College3
and Dinesh Kumar (2) V. Motilal Nehru Medical College4. Presently,
under the AIQ scheme, 15% UG seats and 50% PG seats in State-run
institutions are surrendered by the States to the AIQ. The remaining
seats in the State institutions are reserved for candidates domiciled in
the respective States.
4. The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005 amended
Article 15 of the Constitution by inserting clause (5) to Article 15 to
empower the State to make special provisions (including reservation)
for the advancement of socially and educationally backward classes (or
the OBCs) relating to their admission in educational institutions. Article
15(5) reads thus:
"15. (5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1)
of Article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special
provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes insofar as such special provisions
relate to their admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State,
other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause
(1) of Article 30."
5. In Abhay Nath V. University of Delhi5, this Court held that
reservations for Scheduled Caste ("SC") and Scheduled Tribe ("ST")
candidates are permissible in the AIQ seats. The Central Educational
Institutions (Reservation in Admissions) Act, 2006 ("the 2006 Act"),
which came into effect on 3-1-2007, was enacted to provide for
reservation for students belonging to the SCs, STs and OBCs in Central
educational institutions. The 2006 Act provided that 15% seats shall be
reserved for SCs, 7.5% seats for STs, and 27% seats for OBCs in
Central educational institutions. However, reservation for OBCs was not
extended to State contributed seats for AIQ in State-run institutions.
6. The State of Tamil Nadu granted 50% reservation to OBCs in
State-run medical institutions under the Tamil Nadu Backward Classes,
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in
Educational Institutions and of Appointments or Posts in the Services
under the State) Act, 1993 ("the 1993 Act"). Thus, the State quota
seats were being filled according to the provisions of the 1993 Act. A
writ petition6 was instituted before this Court by Dravida Munnetra
Kazhagam ("DMK") seeking a mandamus to provide OBC reservation in
AIQ. This Court by its order dated 11-6-2020 directed that the issue
be agitated before the Madras High Court. This Court observed thus :
"1. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners seek permission
to withdraw these writ petitions with liberty to approach the High
Court by filing writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution.
2. Permission granted.
3. The writ petitions are, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn
with the aforesaid liberty."
7. Pursuant to the above order, DMK instituted a writ petition8 before
the Madras High Court arguing that the AIQ seats available in State-run
medical and dental institutions in the State of Tamil Nadu must follow
the reservation policy as applicable under the 1993 Act. However, the
Madras High Court after issuing notice in the petition accepted the
argument of the Union Government that the hearing in the matter be
deferred in view of the pendency of a writ petition before this Court on
a similar issue. Aggrieved by the deferral of the hearing, special leave
petitions were instituted before this Court. By its order dated 13-7-
202010, this Court disposed of the petitions holding that the issue
raised in the writ petition pending before it is different from the one
raised by the DMK before the Madras High Court and directed the High
Court to proceed with the hearing of the case. This Court made the
"1. Permission to file special leave petition without certified/plain
copy of the impugned order in Diary No. 13644 of 2020 is granted.
2. These special leave petitions are directed against the order
dated 22-6-2020 by which the High Court adjourned the matters in
view of the pendency of Writ Petition No. 596 of 2015 in this Court.
This order was passed on the basis of the stand taken by the Union
of India that the points arising in the writ petitions filed in the High
Court are similar to those that arose in Saloni Kumari V. DG Health
Services, WP (C) No. 596 of 2015 (SC).
3. We have perused the writ petition filed by Saloni Kumari which
is pending consideration in this Court. The issue that arises in the
writ petition pertains to the implementation of 27% seats for
admission to postgraduate courses in the all-India quota. The
complaint of the petitioner is that the seats in the 27% quota of
OBCs should not be restricted to Central Government institutions.
4. Whereas, the writ petitions pending in the High Court involve a
dispute pertaining to the percentage of reservation to be followed in
State of Tamil Nadu in respect of the surrendered seats in the all-
India quota for PG medical admissions.
5. As the point raised in the writ petitions pending in the High
Court is not similar to that in Saloni Kumari case, the High Court can
proceed to adjudicate the writ petitions on merits. We are informed
that the writ petitions are listed before the High Court for final
hearing on 17-7-2020. The High Court is requested to decide the
writ petitions expeditiously.
6. Special leave petitions are disposed of accordingly."
8. The Madras High Court by its judgment dated 27-7-202011
disposed of the writ petition holding that there are no legal or
constitutional impediments in extending reservation to OBCs in the AIQ
seats in the medical colleges in the State of Tamil Nadu. The High Court
directed the Union Government to constitute an expert committee for
implementing reservation for OBCs in the seats surrendered by the
State of Tamil Nadu in AIQ. However, the High Court observed that the
reservation should be implemented only from the academic year 2021-
2022 since it would disturb the selection process that had been set into
motion for the academic year of 2020-2021. The State of Tamil Nadu
challenged the order of the Madras High Court dated 27-7-202011
before this Court in a special leave petition12 on the limited ground that
the High Court erred in denying implementation of the OBC reservation
for the academic year 2020-2021. In its order dated 26-10-2020 13 , this
Court upheld the order11 of the High Court regarding the
implementation of the OBC reservation from the subsequent academic
year 2021-2022.
9. The MH&FW set up an expert committee to determine the
modalities of granting reservation to OBC candidates in AIQ seats in UG
and PG courses in State-run medical colleges within the State of Tamil
Nadu from the academic year 2021-2022. The committee
recommended two options in its final report i.e. either State-specific
reservation can be implemented for OBCs in AIQ seats or OBC
reservation can be granted in terms of the provisions of the 2006 Act.
10. A contempt petition14 was instituted by DMK before the Madras
High Court against the Union of India for non-implementation of OBC
reservation in AIQ seats. In the meanwhile, a notice dated 29-7-2021
was issued by the Directorate General of Health Services, MoHFW to
implement 27% OBC reservation (non-creamy layer) and 10% EWS
reservation in the 15% UG and 50% PG AIQ seats in the current
academic session of 2021-22. The notice stated thus:
"NOTICE
Urgent Attention Candidates of NEET-UG and NEET-PG
It has been decided by the Government of India to implement
27% OBC reservation (non-creamy layer) and 10% EWS reservation
in the 15% AIQ UG seats and the 50% all-India quota seats
(MBBS/BDS and MD/MS/MDS) (contributed by the State/UTs). This
reservation will take effect from the current academic session 2021-
22.
Consequently, the overall reservation in 15% UG and 50% PG all-
India quota seats would be as follows:
SC-15%
ST-7.5%
OBC (non-creamy layer) as per the Central OBC list-27%
EWS- as per the Central Government norms-10%
PwD-5% horizontal reservation as per NMC norms"
11. By its order dated 25-8-2021 15 , the Madras High Court
dismissed the contempt petition since the Union Government had
complied with the order dated 27-7-202011 of the Madras High Court by
constituting a committee. The High Court observed thus : (Rajesh
"66.
(i) Since the committee required to be constituted by the
order dated 27-7-2020- 11 was constituted and such committee gave
its opinion and the Union, or its appropriate agencies, have acted on
the basis thereof - albeit not exactly in terms of the
recommendations - no case of wilful or deliberate violation of the
said order can be said to have been made out."
12. Nonetheless, the High Court proceeded to scrutinise the validity
of the Notification dated 29-7-2021 providing reservation for OBC and
EWS candidates in AIQ seats in medical and dental institutions. With
respect to the reservation granted to EWS under the Notification dated
29-7-2021, the High Court observed that such reservation can be
permitted only with the approval of this Court. Special leave petitions
were instituted before this Court challenging the order of the Madras
High Court. This Court by its order dated 24-9-2021 16 disposed of the
petitions observing that the Madras High Court in its contempt
jurisdiction could not have entered into a discussion on the validity of
the EWS reservation provided by the Notice dated 29-7-2021 and set
aside the direction that the approval of this Court should be received
before implementing reservation for the EWS category in AIQ seats.
13. We have traced the trajectory of the introduction of OBC
reservation in NEET AIQ seats, which is challenged before this Court in
the present batch of writ petitions. By its order dated 7-1-20221, this
Court upheld the constitutional validity of the OBC reservation in AIQ
medical and dental UG and PG seats. The constitutionality of the criteria
used for the identification of the EWS category is yet to be decided.
However, in the interim, this Court directed that the counselling in
NEET-PG 2021 and NEET-UG 2021 be conducted by giving effect to the
reservation provided by the Notice dated 29-7-2021, including the 27%
OBC reservation and 10% EWS reservation. The challenge to the
validity of the OBC reservation in AIQ seats is dealt with in this
judgment.
B. Pendency of the writ petition instituted by Saloni Kumari
14. We are aware that a writ petition was filed by Saloni Kumari
seeking 27% OBC reservation in AIQ seats in State-run medical
institutions on the ground that such reservation should not be
restricted to Central education institutions in terms of the 2006 Act.
The claim raised in that petition was of parity. The issue that has been
raised before us is of the validity of the
Notification dated 29-7-2021 that provides for 27% OBC reservation in
the AIQ seats in UG and PG seats from the academic year 2021-2022.
On account of the difference in the nature of the issues raised before
this Court, we will proceed to rule on the validity of the Notification
dated 29-7-2021.
C. Submissions of counsel
15. Mr Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners argued that there must be no reservation for the OBC
community in the AIQ quota. In pursuance of this argument, he made
the following submissions:
15.1. In Pradeep Jain V. Union of India², this Court raised serious
concerns about the reservation in PG seats. Once a person is qualified
as a doctor, he cannot be treated as belonging to a backward class
anymore. Therefore, admission in PG seats must be purely based on
merit, without any reservation.
15.2. At the level of PG and super-speciality ("SS"), doctors are
required to possess high degree of skill and expert knowledge in
specialised areas. This skill cannot be acquired by everyone. It would
be detrimental to national interest to have reservations at this stage.
Opportunities that are available for such training are minimal and
therefore, it should only be available to the most meritorious.
15.3. This Court in Pradeep Jain² created a right against reservation
in the AIQ seats. The judgment of this Court in Abhay Nath V.
University of Delhi3 allowing reservations for SC and ST categories in
the AIQ is per incuriam in light of the judgments in Pradeep Jain²,
Union of India V. R. Rajeshwaran17 and Union of India V. K.
Jayakumar
15.4. The AIQ scheme was conceived by this Court in Pradeep Jain²
and developed in Dinesh Kumar (1)3 and Dinesh Kumar (2)4. Therefore,
only this Court can alter the reservation scheme in the AIQ seats. The
Union Government ought to have made an application to this Court
apprising it of its intention to provide reservation for OBC and EWS
categories in AIQ, and this Court could decide to allow or deny
permission.
15.5. It has been held by this Court in Preeti Srivastava V. State of
M.P. and various other cases that reservation in PG courses must be
19
minimum.
15.6. Even if reservation for the OBC category in the AIQ seats is
constitutionally valid, it ought not to have been introduced for the
academic year of 2021-2022 since the notice on reservation for the OBC
category was introduced after the registration window was closed. It is
a settled principle that the rules of the game cannot be changed after
the game has begun.
15.7. The candidates had registered for the exam against a certain
seat matrix, having knowledge of the total number of seats for which
they could compete. The impugned notification alters the seat matrix,
changing the rules of the game after the game had begun.
15.8. The phrase "as may be applicable" in Clause 11.1 of the
Information Bulletin must be read to mean the reservation applicable
as on the date of registration. The rules of the game were set when the
registration closed.
15.9. In specific branches of specialisation such as MD Radiology,
MD Dermatology, MD Gynaecology, MS Psychiatry, MD (Chest), MD
Preventive and Social Medicine, MD Forensic Medicine, MS Microbiology,
MS Pathology, MD Biochemistry, MS Anatomy, MS Orthopaedics, and
MS ENT, no SS course is offered in India. Therefore, such courses are
the end of the branch and there must be no reservation in such courses
since they are equivalent to SS courses [Preeti Srivastava¹9.
16. The Union of India addressed the following arguments
contending that the 27% reservation for the OBC category in AIQ seats
is constitutionally valid. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General and Mr K.M.
Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General made the following submissions:
16.1. The rules of the game were not changed after the process had
begun since the reservation through the impugned Notice issued on 29-
7-2021 was introduced much prior to the date on which the exams
were conducted and before the commencement of the counselling
process. The NEET-PG examination schedule is as follows:
(a) Release of information brochure : 23-2-2021
(b) Commencement of registration process : 23-2-2021
(c) Last date of registration : 15-3-2021
(d) Scheduled examination date : 18-4-2021
(e) Postponement for four months on : 3-5-2021
(f) New date of examinations announced on : 13-7-2021
(g) New date for examination : 11-9-2021
Clause 11.1 of the Information Bulletin issued on 23-2-2021 states that
reservation of PG seats shall be as per the norms of the Central
Government and the respective State Governments. Clause 11.2 states
that a separate handbook providing information on the counselling
process and applicable reservation shall be released by the designated
counselling authority for NEET-PG 2021. Therefore, the process begins
only with the commencement of the counselling process and not when
the registration closes.
16.2. Reservation in AIQ seats according to the impugned notice has
been implemented for MDS admissions in the current academic year of
2021-22.
16.3. The AIQ scheme was introduced in 1986 to provide domicile
free admission to students from across the country. Till 2007, there was
no reservation in the AIQ. In 2007, this Court in Abhay Nath5 permitted
15% reservation for the SCs and 7.5% reservation for the STs in the
AIQ seats. The 2006 Act providing 27% reservation to OBCs which
came into force in 2007 was implemented in all Central educational
institutions, including medical colleges run by the Central Government.
16.4. The AIQ scheme is a Central scheme. Therefore, the Central
List of OBCs shall be used for implementing the reservation. Around
1500 OBC students in UG and 2500 in PG will be benefitted through
reservation for OBC category in AIQ seats.
16.5. In the last six years, MBBS seats in the country have been
increased by 56% from 54,348 in 2014 to 84,649 seats in 2020. The
number of PG medical seats has been increased by 80% from 30,191
seats in 2014 to 54,275 seats in 2020.
16.6. Providing reservation for the AIQ seats in medical/dental
courses is a matter of policy.
16.7. Though observations have been made by this Court on the
desirability or otherwise of reservation in PG courses, it has never been
held to be unconstitutional.
16.8. This Court in Pradeep Jain only held that there would be no
domicile-based reservation in the AIQ seats. It was not held that no
reservation otherwise would be impermissible in the AIQ seats.
Subsequent decisions of this Court (Saurabh Chaudri V. Union of
India²0, Gulshan Prakash V. State of Haryana21) have clarified that this
Court in Pradeep Jain* had only observed that the AIQ seats shall be
free from domicile reservation.
17. Mr P. Wilson, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the DMK,
submitted that the 27% reservation for the OBC seats in the AIQ is
constitutionally valid. The Senior Counsel made the following
submissions:
17.1. Parliament by the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act,
2005 introduced clause (5) in Article 15 providing reservation for the
SCs, STs and socially and educationally backward classes (or the OBCs)
in admission to educational institutions, including private educational
institutions, aided or unaided by the State and other minority
educational institutions. Pursuant to the amendment, the Union
Government enacted the 2006 Act providing 27% reservation for the
OBC category in Central educational institutions. The Supreme Court
upheld the constitutional validity of the Ninety-Third Constitutional
Amendment and the 2006 Act in Ashoka Kumar Thakur (8) V. Union of
India²2. The Tamil Nadu State Legislature enacted the Tamil Nadu
Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation
of Seats in Educational Institutions and of Appointments or Posts in the
Services under the State) Act, 1993 providing 69% reservation. The
enactment permits 50% reservation for backward classes and the most
backward classes. Therefore, both the State Legislature and Parliament
allow reservation for the OBC category.
17.2. Regulation 9(IV) of the PG Medical Education Regulations,
2000 and Regulation 5(5) of the UG Medical Education Regulations
stipulate reservation for the categories based on the applicable laws
prevailing in the States/Union Territories. Therefore, reservation must
be applicable to all seats including the State contributed seats of AIQ.
17.3. Merit cannot be measured solely in terms of marks. Merit must
be construed in terms of the social value of a member in the medical
profession (Pradeep Jain²).
17.4. In UG courses, the States contribute 15% seats to the AIQ. Of
the 6060 seats in the AIQ contributed by the States, 1636 seats (that
is 27%) seats ought to have been reserved for the OBC category on the
enactment of the 2006 Act. Similarly, 2569 of the 9515 seats
contributed by the States to the AIQ in PG courses ought to have been
reserved for the OBC category.
17.5. The Madras High Court in a judgment dated 27-7-2020 [in
WP No. 8626 (sic 8326) of 2020] had observed that there was no legal
or constitutional impediment in extending the benefit of reservation to
the OBC category in the AIQ in PG courses. The petitioners have not
challenged the judgment of the Madras High Court.
17.6. Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin for the NEET-PG
examination states that reservation would be "as per the norms of GoI
and State prevailing at the time of counselling". Therefore, the
argument of the petitioners that the rules of the game should not be
changed in the middle of the game would be applicable only if the
reservation was introduced after the counselling had begun.
17.7. The submission of the petitioners that no reservation was
provided at the level of SS in view of the judgment of this Court in
Preeti Srivastava¹9 is erroneous since the 2006 Act only exempts
reservations in institutions of excellence, research institutions, and
institutions of national and strategic importance specified in the
Schedule to the Act, and minority educational institutions as referred to
under Section 4 of the 2006 Act. Reservation is provided in SS courses
in Central educational institutions such as AIIMS and JIPMER.
17.8. Central medical institutions such as AIIMS and PGI hold their
own examination twice a year for PG courses. There is no demarcation
of State quota and AIQ in these Central institutions. Therefore, the AIQ
PG seats are different from PG seats of Central institutions.
17.9. Reservation can be provided either through a legislation or by
an executive order such as a notification, order, and memorandum.
18. The arguments of the petitioners are threefold : (i) admissions
to PG courses must solely be based on open competition; (ii) this Court
in Pradeep Jain and subsequent cases has held that there shall be no
reservation in the AIQ seats and that admission to the AIQ seats shall
be strictly by open competition; and (iii) as this Court evolved the
concept of AIQ seats, any reservation to be introduced in the AIQ seats
must only be pursuant to the direction of this Court.
D. Analysis
D.1. The Merit of Reservation
19. On behalf of the petitioners, it was urged that at the level of PG
courses, a high degree of skill and expertise is required. Thus, such
opportunities must be available to the most meritorious and providing
any reservation for PG seats would be detrimental to national interest.
In effect, a binary was sought to be created between merit and
reservation, where reservation becomes antithetical to establishing
meritocracy. This is not a novel argument. There has been a
longstanding debate over whether reservation for any class impinges on
the idea of merit. In the Constituent Assembly Debates on draft Article
10, which has been incorporated as Article 16 of the Constitution, some
members raised concerns on the inclusion of clause (3) to draft Article
10 [now Article 16(4) of the Constitution] which provided that the
State is empowered to make reservation in appointments or posts in
favour of any backward class of citizens who, in the opinion of the
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
Certain members of the Constituent Assembly argued for the deletion
of clause (3). For instance, Shri Loknath Misra stated that such a
provision puts, "a premium on backwardness and inefficiency" and no
citizen had a fundamental right "to claim a portion of State
employment, which ought to go by merit alone". Shri Damodar Swarup
Seth argued that reservation results in the "very negation of efficiency
and good Government" and appointments should be "made on merit
and qualification". However, the Constituent Assembly rejected these
claims and adopted clause (3) of draft Article 10.
20. Although there was debate on the meaning of "backward
classes", it was felt that there must be a provision that enables entry of
those communities into administration since they were deprived of such
access in the past and formal equality of opportunity would not
suffice. 23 However, the view that merit or efficiency in service is distinct
from concerns of advancement of backward classes persisted for some
members. Shri K.M. Munshi (a member of the Drafting Committee)
observed that : (CAD, Vol. VII, p. 697)
"
What we want to secure by this clause [Article 10] are two
things. In the fundamental right in the first clause we want to
achieve the highest efficiency in the services of the State-highest
efficiency which would
enable the services to function effectively and promptly. At the same
time, in view of the conditions in our country prevailing in several
provinces, we want to see that Backward Classes, classes who are really
backward, should be given scope in the State services; for it is realised
that State services give a status and an opportunity to serve the
country, and this opportunity should be extended to every community,
even among the backward people."
However, many members also recognised that merit cannot be
separated from the function of the existing inequalities in society. They
envisaged that social justice must be read into the promise of equality
of opportunity; otherwise the latter merely advances the interests of
the privileged.
21. During the debates on draft Article 286, which pertained to the
functions of Public Service Commission with regard to appointments to
public posts, Dr P.S. Deshmukh argued that : (CAD, Vol. IX, p. 601)
"
People's capacities cannot be measured by mere passing of
examinations or obtaining the highest possible marks. But those
communities who have had the advantage of English education,
because they were prepared to be more servile than the rest, think it
is a preserve of theirs, and whenever anybody gets up and speaks on
behalf of the millions who have had no chances of education, they
consider it as a threat to their monopoly on the part of the rest of the
communities and accuse the advocates as communal and
communally-minded. There is no communalism in this. Neither I nor
anybody who speaks on their behalf want any particular community
to dominate, where as those who oppose this move are interested
only in particular communities. They want to preserve communalism
while accusing us of communalism because they have had the
advantage of education which they fear will be taken away. They
think and urge that merit is or can be tested only by examinations.
But so far as the masses of the country are concerned, the millions
of our populations who have not had even the chance to get primary
school education, they have no place so far as the public services are
concerned, so long as the present system lasts.
22. Shri Phool Singh emphatically provided a conception of
substantive equality when he stated that merit of candidates cannot be
evaluated through an open competition without regard to their social
positions. He further highlighted that the meaning of merit should also
take into reference the task that is to be carried out. He stated thus :
(CAD, Vol. IX, p. 616)
"
Much has been made of merit in this case; but equal merit pre
-supposes equal opportunity, and I think it goes without saying that
the toiling masses are denied all those opportunities which a few
literate people living in big cities enjoy. To ask the people from the
villages to compete with those city people is asking a man on bicycle
to compete
with another on a motorcycle, which in itself is absurd. Then again,
merit should also have some reference to the task to be discharged. Mr
Tyagi interrupted Dr Deshmukh by saying that it is a fight for the
illiterates. I think, however sarcastic that remark may be, he was
probably right. Self-Government, means a government by the people,
and if the people are illiterate, a few leaders have no right to usurp all
the power to themselves. This cry, this bogey of merit and fair play is
being raised by those who are in a[n] advantageous position and who
stand to suffer if others also come into the picture.
23. While these observations were made in the context of
employment to public posts, the debate on conceptualisation of
reservation as an exception to the principle of merit has relevance in
regard to admission to educational institutions as well. The debates in
Constituent Assembly were limited to reservation in public posts
because reservation in educational institutions was introduced through
a subsequent constitutional amendment.
24. On its part, this Court initially subscribed to the binary of merit
and reservation. Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1) were thought to embody
the general principle of formal equality. Articles 15(4) and 16(4) were
understood to be exceptions to this general principle, advancing the
cause of social justice. This Court sought to balance these competing
imperatives. In such an understanding, merit is equated to formal
equality of opportunity which has to be balanced against the concerns
of social justice through reservation. In M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore25,
a Constitution Bench of this Court observed that Article 15(4) is an
exception to Article 15(1), which was introduced "because the interests
of the society at large would be served by promoting advancements of
the weaker elements in the society". 25 However, since
Article
15(4)
(or
reservation) was considered at odds with the notion of formal equality
under Article 15(1), which is broadly understood as complying with the
principle of merit, this Court observed that there should be a cap on
25
reservations, which it specified generally should be 50%.
25. This Court stated : (M.R. Balaji case25, AIR p. 662, para 32)
"32.
Therefore, in considering the question about the propriety
of the reservation made by the impugned order, we cannot lose sight
of the fact that the reservation is made in respect of higher
university education. The demand for technicians, scientists, doctors,
economists, engineers and experts for the further economic
advancement of the country is so great that it would cause grave
prejudice to national interests if considerations of merit are
completely excluded by wholesale reservation of seat in all technical,
medical or engineering colleges or institutions of that kind.
Therefore, considerations of national interest and the interests of the
community or society as a whole cannot be ignored in determining the
question as to whether the special provision contemplated by Article 15
(4) can be special provision which excludes the rest of the society
altogether. In this connection, it would be relevant to mention that the
University Education Commission which considered the problem of the
assistance to backward communities, has observed that the percentage
of reservation shall not exceed a third of the total number of seats, and
it has added that the principle of reservation may be adopted for a
period of ten years (p. 53)."
26. This view was followed by this Court in subsequent judgments
where a special provision made for the benefit of a class was seen as a
26
deviation from the principle of formal equality. However, the
dominant view of this Court was challenged by R. Subba Rao, J. in his
dissent in T. Devadasan V. Union of India²7 where the learned Judge
stated that Article 16(4) is not an exception but rather a facet of Article
16(1), which seeks to redress the historical disadvantage suffered by
certain communities. Subba Rao, J. observed thus : (AIR pp. 189-90,
para 23)
"23. Article 14 lays down the general rule of equality. Article 16 is
an instance of the application of the general rule with special
reference to opportunity of appointments under the State. It says
that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters
relating to employment or appointment to any office under the
State. If it stood alone, all the backward communities would go to
the wall in a society of uneven basic social structure; the said rule of
equality would remain only an utopian conception unless a practical
content was given to it. Its strict enforcement brings about the very
situation it seeks to avoid. To make my point clear, take the
illustration of a horse race. Two horses are set down to run a race -
one is a first class race horse and the other an ordinary one. Both are
made to run from the same starting point. Though theoretically they
are given equal opportunity to run the race, in practice the ordinary
horse is not given an equal opportunity to compete with the race
horse. Indeed, that is denied to it. So a handicap may be given
either in the nature of extra weight or a start from a longer distance.
By doing so, what would otherwise have been a farce of a
competition would be made a real one. The same difficulty had
confronted the makers of the Constitution at the time it was made.
Centuries of calculated oppression and habitual submission reduced
a considerable section of our community to a life of serfdom. It
would be well-nigh impossible to raise their standards if the doctrine
of equal opportunity was strictly enforced in their case. They would
not have any chance if they were made to enter the open field of
competition without adventitious aids till such time when they could
stand on their own legs.
That is why the makers of the Constitution introduced clause (4) in
Article 16. The expression "nothing in this Article" is a legislative device
to express its intention in a most emphatic way that the power
conferred thereunder is not limited in any way by the main provision
but falls outside it. It has not really carved out an exception, but has
preserved a power untrammelled by the other provisions of the Article."
27. The view expressed by Subba Rao, J. was adopted by this Court
in State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas28 which transformed the equality
jurisprudence in India from that of formal equality to substantive
equality; thus, also changing our understanding of reservations. A.N.
para 44)
"44. Our Constitution aims at equality of status and opportunity
for all citizens including those who are socially, economically and
educationally backward. The claims of members of Backward Classes
require adequate representation in legislative and executive bodies.
If members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes, who are said by this
Court to be Backward Classes, can maintain minimum necessary
requirement of administrative efficiency, not only representation but
also preference may be given to them to enforce equality and to
eliminate inequality. Articles 15(4) and 16(4) bring out the position
of Backward Classes to merit equality. Special provisions are made
for the advancement of Backward Classes and reservations of
appointments and posts for them to secure adequate representation.
These provisions will bring out the content of equality guaranteed by
Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1). The basic concept of equality is
equality of opportunity for appointment. Preferential treatment for
members of Backward Classes with due regard to administrative
efficiency alone can mean equality of opportunity for all citizens.
Equality under Article 16 could not have a different content from
equality under Article 14. Equality of opportunity for unequals can
only mean aggravation of inequality. Equality of opportunity admits
discrimination with reason and prohibits discrimination without
reason. Discrimination with reasons means rational classification for
differential treatment having nexus to the constitutionally
permissible object. Preferential representation for the Backward
Classes in services with due regard to administrative efficiency is
permissible object and Backward Classes are a rational classification
recognised by our Constitution. Therefore, differential treatment in
standards of selection are within the concept of equality."
28. The majority of the Judges in N.M. Thomas case 28 accepted that
special provisions (including reservation) made for the benefit of any
class are not an exception to the general principle of equality. Special
provisions are a method to ameliorate the structural inequalities that
exist in the society, without which, true or factual equality will remain
illusory. K.K. Mathew, J. in his concurring
opinion observed that while equality under Article 16(1) is individual-
centric28 (which was the view of the majority - Mathew and Beg, JJ.'s
majority opinions, and Khanna and Gupta, JJ.'s dissents), the manner
in which it is to be achieved is through the identification of groups that
do not enjoy equal access to certain rights and entitlements. The
28
learned Judge made the following observations : (N.M. Thomas case ,
"73. There is no reason why this Court should not also require the
State to adopt a standard of proportional equality which takes
account of the differing conditions and circumstances of a class of
citizens whenever those conditions and circumstances stand in the
way of their equal access to the enjoyment of basic rights or claims.
74. The concept of equality of opportunity in matters of
employment is wide enough to include within it compensatory
measures to put the members of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes on a par with the members of other communities
which would enable them to get their share of representation in
public service. How can any member of the so-called forward
communities complain of a compensatory measure made by the
Government to ensure the members of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes their due share of representation in public
services?
75. It is said that Article 16(4) specifically provides for reservation
of posts in favour of Backward Classes which according to the
decision of this Court would include the power of the State to make
reservation at the stage of promotion also and therefore Article 16(1)
cannot include within its compass the power to give any adventitious
aids by legislation or otherwise to the Backward Classes which would
derogate from strict numerical equality. If reservation is necessary
either at the initial stage or at the stage of promotion or at both to
ensure for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes equality of opportunity in the matter of employment, I see no
reason why that is not permissible under Article 16(1) as that alone
might put them on a parity with the forward communities in the
matter of achieving the result which equality of opportunity would
produce. Whether there is equality of opportunity can be gauged
only by the equality attained in the result. Formal equality of
opportunity simply enables people with more education and
intelligence to capture all the posts and to win over the less
fortunate in education and talent even when the competition is fair.
Equality of result is the test of equality of opportunity."
Thus, the learned Judge envisaged that equality of individuals is to be
achieved by addressing the structural barriers faced by certain classes
of citizens, which he called the "conditions and circumstances [that]
stand in the way of their equal access to the enjoyment of basic rights
or claims".
29. Krishna Iyer, J. and Fazal Ali, J. in their concurring opinions went
a step further to argue that the content of Article 16(1) is not individual
-centric rather it aims to provide equality of opportunity to sections that
face structural barriers to their advancement. Krishna Iyer, J. invoked
Article 46 of the Constitution, which although unenforceable, was
employed for giving effect to Article 16(1). In his opinion both Articles
16(1) and 16(4) function to equalise group inequalities albeit in
different contexts. The learned Judge observed thus : (N.M. Thomas
28
"137. "Reservation" based on classification of backward and
forward classes, without detriment to administrative standards (as
this Court has underscored) is but an application of the principle of
equality within a class and grouping based on a rational differentia,
the object being advancement of Backward Classes consistently with
efficiency. Articles 16(1) and (4) are concordant. This Court has
viewed Article 16(4) as an exception to Article 16(1). Does
classification based on desperate backwardness render Article 16(4)
redundant? No. Reservation confers pro tanto monopoly, but
classification grants under Article 16(1) ordinarily a lesser order of
advantage. The former is more rigid, the latter more flexible,
although they may overlap sometimes. Article 16(4) covers all
Backward Classes; but to earn the benefit of grouping under Article
16(1) based on Articles 46 and 335 as I have explained, the twin
considerations of terrible backwardness of the type Harijans endure
and maintenance of administrative efficiency must be satisfied."
30. Fazal Ali, J. in his concurring opinion noted that equality of
opportunity under Article 16(1) entails the removal of barriers faced by
certain classes of society. They cannot be denied the right to equality
and relegated to suffer backwardness only because they do not meet
certain artificial standards set up by institutions. Fazal Ali, J. made the
158)
"158. It is no doubt true that Article 16(1) provides for equality of
opportunity for all citizens in the services under the State. It is,
however, well settled that the doctrine contained in Article 16 is a
hard and reeling reality, a concrete and constructive concept and not
a rigid rule or an empty formula. It is also equally well settled by
several authorities of this Court that Article 16 is merely an incident
of Article 14, Article 14 being the genus is of universal application
whereas Article 16 is the species and seeks to obtain equality of
opportunity in the services under the State. The theory of reasonable
classification is implicit and inherent in the concept of equality for
there can hardly be any country where all the citizens would be
equal in all respects. Equality of opportunity would naturally mean a
fair opportunity not only to one section or the other but to all
sections by removing the handicaps if a particular section of the
society suffers from the same. It has never been disputed in judicial
pronouncements by this Court as also of the various High Courts that
Article 14 permits
reasonable classification. But what Article 14 or Article 16 forbid is
hostile discrimination and not reasonable classification. In other words,
the idea of classification is implicit in the concept of equality because
equality means equality to all and not merely to the advanced and
educated sections of the society. It follows, therefore, that in order to
provide equality of opportunity to all citizens of our country, every class
of citizens must have a sense of equal participation in building up an
egalitarian society, where there is peace and plenty, where there is
complete economic freedom and there is no pestilence or poverty, no
discrimination and oppression, where there is equal opportunity to
education, to work, to earn their livelihood so that the goal of social
justice is achieved. Could we, while conferring benefits on the stronger
and the more advanced sections of the society, ignore the more
Backward Classes merely because they cannot come up to the fixed
standards? Such a course, in my opinion, would lead to denial of
opportunity to the Backward Classes resulting in complete annihilation
of the concept of equality contained in Articles 14 and 16. The only
manner in which the objective of equality as contemplated by the
Founding Fathers of our Constitution and as enshrined in Articles 14
and 16 can be achieved is to boost up the Backward Classes by giving
them concessions, relaxations, facilities, removing handicaps, and
making suitable reservations so that the weaker sections of the people
may compete with the more advanced and in due course of time all
may become equals and backwardness is banished for ever. This can
happen only when we achieve complete economic and social freedom.
In our vast country where we have diverse races and classes of people,
some of whom are drowned in the sea of ignorance and illiteracy, the
concept of equality assumes very important proportions. There are a
number of areas in some States like Kashmir, Sikkim, hilly areas of
U.P., Bihar and the South, where due to lack of communications or
transport, absence of proper educational facilities or because of old
customs and conventions and other environmental reasons, the people
are both socially and educationally backward. Could we say that the
citizens hailing from these areas should continue to remain backward
merely because they fall short of certain artificial standards fixed by
various institutions? The answer must be in the negative. The directive
principles enshrined in our Constitution contain a clear mandate to
achieve equality and social justice. Without going into the vexed
question as to whether or not the directive principles contained in Part
IV override the fundamental rights in Part III there appears to be a
complete unanimity of judicial opinion of this Court that the directive
principles and the fundamental rights should be construed in harmony
with each other and every attempt should be made by the Court, to
resolve any apparent inconsistency. The directive principles contained
in Part IV constitute the stairs to climb the high edifice of a socialistic
State and the fundamental rights are the means through which one can
reach the top of the edifice. I am fortified in my view by several
decisions of this Court to which I will refer briefly."
31. Even if the Judges in N.M. Thomas case 28 differed on whether
Article 16(1) is individual-centric or group-centric, they nonetheless
accepted that Article 16(4) is crucial to achieve substantive equality
that is envisaged under Article 16(1). Articles 16(4), 15(4), and 15(5)
employ group identification as a method through which substantive
equality can be achieved. This may lead to an incongruity where
individual members of an identified group may not be backward or
individuals belonging to the non-identified group may share certain
characteristics of backwardness with members of an identified group.
However, this does not change the underlying rationale of the
reservation policy that seeks to remedy the structural barriers that
disadvantaged groups face in advancing in society. Reservation is one
of the measures that is employed to overcome these barriers. The
individual difference may be a result of privilege, fortune, or
circumstances but it cannot be used to negate the role of reservation in
remedying the structural disadvantage that certain groups suffer.
32. The view that special provisions made for a backward class are
not an exception to the principle of equality was reaffirmed by a nine-
Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney V. Union of India²9 These observations
were made in the context of Articles 16(1) and 16(4). In Jaishri
Laxmanrao Patil V. State of Maharashtra³0 , this Court has observed that
the principles applied for interpreting Article 16 are also to be used for
the interpretation of Article 15. Thus, Articles 15(4) and Article 15(5)
are nothing but a restatement of the guarantee of the right to equality
stipulated in Article 15(1).
33. The crux of the above discussion is that the binary of merit and
reservation has now become superfluous once this Court has recognised
the principle of substantive equality as the mandate of Article 14 and
as a facet of Articles 15(1) and 16(1). An open competitive exam may
ensure formal equality where everyone has an equal opportunity to
participate. However, widespread inequalities in the availability of and
access to educational facilities will result in the deprivation of certain
classes of people who would be unable to effectively compete in such a
system. Special provisions (like reservation) enable such disadvantaged
classes to overcome the barriers they face in effectively competing with
forward classes and thus ensuring substantive equality. The privileges
that accrue to forward classes are not limited to having access to
quality schooling and access to tutorials and coaching centres to
prepare for a competitive examination but also include their social
networks and cultural capital (communication skills, accent, books or
31
academic accomplishments) that they inherit from their family. The
cultural capital ensures that a child is trained unconsciously by the
familial environment to take up higher education or high posts
commensurate with their family's standing.
This works to the disadvantage of individuals who are first-generation
learners and come from communities whose traditional occupations do
not result in the transmission of necessary skills required to perform
well in open examination. They have to put in surplus effort to compete
with their peers from the forward communities. 31 On the other hand,
social networks (based on community linkages) become useful when
individuals seek guidance and advice on how to prepare for examination
and advance in their career even if their immediate family does not
have the necessary exposure. Thus, a combination of family habitus,
community linkages and inherited skills work to the advantage of
individuals belonging to certain classes, which is then classified as
"merit" reproducing and reaffirming social hierarchies.
34. In B.K. Pavitra V. Union of India ³ ², a two-Judge Bench of this
Court, of which one of us was a part (D.Y. Chandrachud, J.) had
observed how apparently neutral systems of examination perpetuate
"134. It is well settled that existing inequalities in society can
lead to a seemingly "neutral" system discriminating in favour of
privileged candidates. As Marc Galanter notes, three broad kinds of
resources are necessary to produce the results in competitive exams
that qualify as indicators of "merit". These are:
(a) economic resources (for prior education, training,
materials, freedom from work, etc.); (b) social and cultural
resources (networks of contacts, confidence, guidance and advice,
information, etc.); and (c) intrinsic ability and hard work. "33
135. The first two criteria are evidently not the products of a
candidate's own efforts but rather the structural conditions into
which they are born. By the addition of upliftment of SCs and STs in
the moral compass of merit in government appointments and
promotions, the Constitution mitigates the risk that the lack of the
first two criteria will perpetuate the structural inequalities existing in
society."
35. This is not to say that performance in competitive examination
or admission in higher educational institutions does not require a great
degree of hard work and dedication but it is necessary to understand
that "merit" is not solely of one's own making. The rhetoric surrounding
merit obscures the way in which family, schooling, fortune and a gift of
talents that the society currently
34
values aids in one's advancement.
Thus, the exclusionary standard of
merit serves to denigrate the dignity of those who face barriers in their
advancement which are not of their own making. But the idea of merit
based on "scores in an exam" requires a deeper scrutiny. While
examinations are a necessary and convenient method of distributing
educational opportunities, marks may not always be the best gauge of
individual merit. Even then marks are often used as a proxy for merit.
Individual calibre transcends performance in an examination.
Standardised measures such as examination results are not the most
accurate assessment of the qualitative difference between candidates. 35
36. Ashwini Deshpande highlights that there is always a degree of
separation between what examinations claim to measure and what they
actually measure. He states:
"
most examinations and tests have an inevitably indexical
character - they claim to measure something more than (or other
than) what is established by the actual tasks they set. Thus, for
example, a candidate aspiring to join civil service may take an
entrance exam where she appears in papers in, say geology,
philosophy and general knowledge. On the basis of her performance
in these papers, the entrance exam claims to predict her potential
ability to be a good civil servant. There is at best a rather indirect
link between good at writing exam answers in geology, philosophy
and general knowledge and being a good civil servant. This is the
sense in which the exam and the candidate's performance in it
serves as an index - an indicator - of something else, namely, her
potential to be a good civil servant.
All examinations are more of less indexical, even those that have
a lot of "practical" components involving activities that appear to be
very close to what successful candidates will eventually be doing
professionally. All other things being equal, indexicality tends to
weaken diagnostic claims of the examination. Because of this, the
higher the stakes, the greater the ideological energy that is spent on
building up the prestige and popular deference accorded to the
exam. That is why exams guarding the gateway to a prized
profession or status are steeped in hyperbole and are socially
required (so to speak) to be traumatic bloodbaths. Anything less
would not only undermine the status of the status that they are
guarding, it would also endanger the main social function that such
exams perform, which is to persuade the vast majority of aspirants
to consent to their exclusion. "36
37. At the best, an examination can only reflect the current
competence of an individual but not the gamut of their potential,
capabilities or excellence, 36 which are also shaped by lived experiences,
subsequent training and individual character. The meaning of "merit"
itself cannot be reduced to marks even if it is a convenient way of
distributing educational resources. When examinations claim to be
more than systems of resource allocation, they produce a warped
system of ascertaining the worth of individuals as students or
professionals. Additionally, since success in examinations results in the
ascription of high social status as a "meritorious individual", they often
perpetuate and reinforce the existing ascriptive identities of certain
communities as "intellectual" and "competent" by rendering invisible
the social, cultural and economic advantages that increase the
probabilities of success. Thus, we need to reconceptualise the meaning
of "merit". For instance, if a high-scoring candidate does not use their
talents to perform good actions, it would be difficult to call them
"meritorious" merely because they scored high marks. The propriety of
actions and dedication to public service should also be seen as markers
of merit, which cannot be assessed in a competitive examination.
Equally, fortitude and resilience required to uplift oneself from
conditions of deprivation is reflective of individual calibre.
38. Such a formulation of merit was emphasised by this Court in
"12. But let us understand what we mean when we say that
selection for admission to medical colleges must be based on merit.
What is merit which must govern the process of selection? It
undoubtedly consists of a high degree of intelligence coupled with a
keen and incisive mind, sound knowledge of the basic subjects and
infinite capacity for hard work, but that is not enough; it also calls
for a sense of social commitment and dedication to the cause of the
poor. We agree with Krishna Iyer, J., when he says in Jagadish Saran
"If potential for rural service or aptitude for rendering medical
attention among backward people is a criterion of merit - and it,
undoubtedly, is in a land of sickness and misery, neglect and
penury, wails and tears - then, surely, belonging to a university
catering to a deprived region is a plus point of merit. Excellence is
composite and the heart and its sensitivity are as precious in the
scale of educational values as the head and its creativity and
social medicine for the common people is more relevant than peak
performance in freak cases."
Merit cannot be measured in terms of marks alone, but human sympathies are
equally important. The heart is as much a factor as the head in assessing the
social value of a member of the medical profession. This is also an aspect which
may, to the limited extent possible, be borne in mind while determining merit for
selection of candidates for admission to medical colleges though concededly it
would not be easy to do so, since it is a factor which is extremely difficult to judge
and not easily susceptible to evaluation."
39. However, after contextualising the meaning of merit, in the next
paragraph this Court reverted to equating the selection process adopted
for admission to merit. However, irrespective of the true purport of
merit, this Court notes that the selection process for admission must
satisfy the test of equality. This Court observed thus : (Pradeep Jain
"13. We may now proceed to consider what are the circumstances
in which departure may justifiably be made from the principle of
selection based on merit. Obviously, such departure can be justified
only on equality-oriented grounds, for whatever be the principle of
selection followed for making admissions to medical colleges, it must
satisfy the test of equality. Now the concept of equality under the
Constitution is a dynamic concept. It takes within its sweep every
process of equalisation and protective discrimination. Equality must
not remain mere idle incantation but it must become a living reality
for the large masses of people. In a hierarchical society with an
indelible feudal stamp and incurable actual inequality, it is absurd to
suggest that progressive measures to eliminate group disabilities
and promote collective equality are antagonistic to equality on the
ground that every individual is entitled to equality of opportunity
based purely on merit judged by the marks obtained by him. We
cannot countenance such a suggestion, for to do so would make the
equality clause sterile and perpetuate existing inequalities. Equality
of opportunity is not simply a matter of legal equality. Its existence
depends not merely on the absence of disabilities but on the
presence of abilities. Where, therefore, there is inequality, in fact,
legal equality always tends to accentuate it. What the famous poet
William Blake said graphically is very true, namely, "One law for the
Lion and the Ox is oppression". Those who are unequal, in fact,
cannot be treated by identical standards; that may be equality in law
but it would certainly not be real equality. It is, therefore, necessary
to take into account de facto inequalities which exist in the society
and to take affirmative action by way of giving preference to the
socially and economically disadvantaged persons or inflicting
handicaps on those more advantageously placed, in order to bring
about real equality. Such affirmative action though apparently
discriminatory is calculated to produce equality on a broader basis by
eliminating de facto inequalities and placing the weaker sections of
the community on a footing of equality with the stronger and more
powerful sections so that each member of the
community, whatever is his birth, occupation or social position may
enjoy equal opportunity of using to the full his natural endowments of
physique, of character and of intelligence. We may in this connection
usefully quote what Mathew, J., said in Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College
`132.
it is obvious that "equality in law precludes
discrimination of any kind; whereas equality in fact may involve
the necessity of differential treatment in order to attain a result
which establishes an equilibrium between different situations."39,
We cannot, therefore, have arid equality which does not take into account the
social and economic disabilities and inequalities from which large masses of
people suffer in the country. Equality in law must produce real equality; de jure
equality must ultimately find its raison d'être in de facto equality. The State must,
therefore, resort to compensatory State action for the purpose of making people
who are factually unequal in their wealth, education or social environment, equal in
specified areas. The State must, to use again the words of Krishna lyer, J., in
`29.
weave those special facilities into the web of equality
which, in an equitable setting, provide for the weak and promote
their levelling up so that, in the long run, the community at large
may enjoy a general measure of real equal opportunity. equality
is not negated or neglected where special provisions are geared to
the larger goal of the disabled getting over their disablement
consistently with the general good and individual merit.'
The scheme of admission to medical colleges may, therefore, depart from the
principle of selection based on merit, where it is necessary to do so for the
purpose of bringing about real equality of opportunity between those who are
unequals."
(emphasis in original)
40. It is important to clarify here that after the decision in N.M.
Thomas20 there is no constitutional basis to subscribe to the binary of
merit and reservation. If open examinations present equality of
opportunity to candidates to compete, reservations ensure that the
opportunities are distributed in such a way that backward classes are
equally able to benefit from such opportunities which typically evade
them because of structural barriers. This is the only manner in which
merit can be a democratising force that equalises inherited
disadvantages and privileges. Otherwise claims of individual merit are
nothing but tools of obscuring inheritances that underlie achievements.
41. If merit is a social good that must be protected, we must first
critically examine the content of merit. As noted above, scores in an
exam are not the sole determinant of excellence or capability. Even if
for the sake of argument, it is assumed that scores do reflect
excellence, it is not the only value that is considered as a social good.
We must look at the distributive consequences of merit. Accordingly,
how we assess merit should also encapsulate if it mitigates or
entrenches inequalities. As Amartya Sen argues:
"If, for example, the conceptualization of a good society includes
the absence of serious economic inequalities, then in the
characterization of instrumental goodness, including the assessment
of what counts as merit, note would have to be taken of the
propensity of putative merit to lessen-or generate-economic
inequality. In this case, the rewarding of merit cannot be done
independent of its distributive consequences.
*
*
*
In most versions of modern meritocracy, however, the selected
objectives tend to be almost exclusively oriented towards aggregate
achievements (without any preference against inequality), and
sometimes the objectives chosen are even biased (often implicitly)
towards the interests of more fortunate groups (favouring the
outcomes that are more preferred by "talented" and "successful"
sections of the population). This can reinforce and augment the
tendency towards inequality that might be present even with an
objective function that inter alia, attaches some weight to lower
inequality levels. "40
42. A similar understanding of merit was advanced by this Court in
"131. Once we understand "merit" as instrumental in achieving
goods that we as a society value, we see that the equation of "merit"
with performance at a few narrowly defined criteria is incomplete. A
meritocratic system is one that rewards actions that result in the
outcomes that we as a society value."
43. An oppositional paradigm of merit and reservation serves to
entrench inequalities by relegating reserved candidates to the sphere of
incompetence, and diminishing their capabilities. We have already
stated that while examinations are a necessary and convenient method
to allocate educational resources, they are not effective markers of
merit. The way we understand merit should not be limited to individual
agency or ability (which in any event is not solely of our own doing) but
it should be envisioned as a social good that advances equality because
that is the value that our Constitution espouses. It is important to note
that equality here does not merely have a redistributive dimension but
also includes recognising the worth and dignity of every individual. The
content of merit cannot be devoid of what we value
in society. Based on the above discussion, we find it difficult to accept
the narrow definition of merit (that is, decontextualised individual
achievement). We believe such a definition hinders the realisation of
substantive equality.
44. Coming to the issue of whether reservation can be permitted in
PG courses, it is evident Article 15(5) does not make a distinction
between UG and PG courses. Article 5(5) reads thus:
"15. (5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1)
of Article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special
provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes insofar as such special provisions
relate to their admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State,
other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause
(1) of Article 30."
45. The Constitution enables the State to make special provisions for
the advancement of socially and educationally backward classes for
admission to educational institutions at both the UG and PG levels.
While on certain occasions, this Court has remarked that there cannot
be any reservation in SS courses, this Court has never held that
reservations in medical PG courses are impermissible. In Pradeep Jain²,
this Court did not hold that reservation in PG courses is altogether
impermissible. In Preeti Srivastava¹9, this Court was not concerned
with the issue of reservation in PG courses; rather it was concerned
with the question whether it is permissible to prescribe a lower
minimum percentage of qualifying marks for reserved category
candidates in comparison to the general category candidates. In
Students' Union V. AIIMS41 this Court was concerned with the question
of reservation based on institutional preference in PG courses and held
that limited preference to students of the same institution can be given
at the PG level. In Saurabh Chaudri V. Union of India ²0, a Constitution
Bench of this Court observed that reservation in PG courses to a
reasonable extent did not violate the equality clause. 20
46. Mr Divan had urged on behalf of the petitioners that for many
individuals PG is the end of the road and therefore, the PG courses
should be equated with SS courses and no reservation should be
allowed in PG. We find it difficult to accept this argument when this
Court has time and again permitted reservation in PG courses. This
argument merely seeks to create an artificial distinction between the
courses offered at the PG level. Further, only certain medical fields do
not have SS courses and on the basis of that we cannot deem that
reservation is impermissible in PG as a whole. Crucially, the issue here
is whether after graduation, an individual is entitled to reservation on
the ground that they belong to a class that suffers from social and
educational backwardness. In our opinion, it cannot be said that the
impact of backwardness simply disappears because a candidate has a
graduate qualification. Indeed, a
graduate qualification may provide certain social and economic
mobility, but that by itself does not create parity between forward
classes and backward classes. In any event, there cannot be an
assertion of overinclusion where undeserving candidates are said to be
benefitting from reservation because OBC candidates who fall in the
creamy layer are excluded from taking the benefit of reservation. Thus,
we find that there is no prohibition in introducing reservation for
socially and educationally backward classes (or the OBCs) in PG
courses.
D.2. The Court and the AIQ seats
47. In order to address the argument of the petitioners that this
Court in Pradeep Jain and the subsequent cases has held that there
shall be no reservation in the AIQ seats, it is necessary that we
chronologically refer to the development of the concept of AIQ seats by
various cases.
48. In Pradeep Jain², a three-Judge Bench of this Court was deciding
on the constitutional validity of reservation based on domicile and
institutional preference in medical colleges or institutions of higher
learning. Referring to State of U.P. V. Pradip Tandon42 and Nookavarapu
Kanakadurga Devi V. Kakatiya Medical College43, where reservation for
the people of the hills in Uttarakhand and Telangana was held to be
permissible since they were backward regions which would fall within
the ambit of socially and educationally backward classes in Article 15
(4), it was held that reservation or any other affirmative action
programme based on residence or domicile is not arbitrary and violative
of Article 14. However, it was also observed that it is desirable to admit
students to the MBBS course on an all-India basis, in furtherance of
"merit", without any classification based on residence. It was observed
that however, in view of the inequality in the society where a few areas
within a State, and a few States on comparison to others are backward,
admission based on an all-India examination will lead to inequality :
"19.
Theoretically, of course, if admissions are given on the
basis of all-India national entrance examination, each individual
would have equal opportunity of securing admission, but that would
not take into account diverse considerations, such as, differing level
of social, economic and educational development of different regions,
disparity in the number of seats available for admission to the MBBS
course in different States, difficulties which may be experienced by
students from one region who might in the competition on all-India
basis get admission to the MBBS course in another region far remote
from their own and other allied factors. There can be no doubt that
the policy of ensuring admissions to the MBBS course on all-India
basis is a highly desirable policy, based as it is on the postulate that
India is one nation and every citizen of India is
entitled to have equal opportunity for education and advancement, but
it is an ideal to be aimed at and it mav not be realistically possible. in
the present circumstances, to adopt it, for it cannot produce real
equality of opportunity unless there is complete absence of disparities
and inequalities - a situation which simply does not exist in the
country today."
49. In order to balance between the claims of legal and factual
equality, it was observed that even if the Union Government decides to
conduct an all-India entrance examination for admission to medical
courses, a certain percentage of seats may be reserved for candidates
based on residence. Further, it was held that wholesale reservation of
100% based on domicile for admission in educational institutions is
"20.
We agree wholly with these observations made by the
learned Judge and we unreservedly condemn wholesale reservation
made by some of the State Governments on the basis of "domicile"
or residence requirement within the State or on the basis of
institutional preference for students who have passed the qualifying
examination held by the university or the State excluding all
students not satisfying this requirement, regardless of merit. We
declare such wholesale reservation to be unconstitutional and void as
being in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution."
50. This Court then determined the quantum of reservation based on
residence and institutional preference. This Court observed that
reservation based on residence in MBBS shall not exceed 70% of the
total seats available, after taking into account other reservations validly
made. It was also observed that the Indian Medical Council must
consider revising the percentage of reservation based on the residence
criteria every three years. The remaining 30% seats were available for
admission on an all-India basis irrespective of the residence of the
"21. But, then to what extent can reservation based on residence
requirement within the State or on institutional preference for
students passing the qualifying examination held by the university
or the State be regarded as constitutionally permissible? It is not
possible to provide a categorical answer to this question for, as
pointed out by the policy statement of the Government of India, the
extent of such reservation 'would depend on several factors including
opportunities for professional education in that particular area, the
extent of competition, level of educational development of the area
and other relevant factors'. It may be that in a State where the level
of educational development is woefully low, there are comparatively
inadequate opportunities for training in the medical speciality and
there is large scale social and economic backwardness, there may be
justification for reservation of a higher percentage of seats in the
medical colleges in the State and such higher percentage may not
militate against "the equality mandate viewed in the perspective of
social justice". So many variables depending on social and economic
facts in the context of educational opportunities would enter into the
determination of the question as to what in the case of any particular
State, should be the limit of reservation based on residence
requirement within the State or on institutional preference. But, in our
opinion, such reservation should in no event exceed the outer limit of
70% of the total number of open seats after taking into account other
kinds of reservations validly made. The Medical Education Review
Committee has suggested that the outer limit should not exceed 75%
but we are of the view that it would be fair and just to fix the outer
limit at 70%. We are laying down this outer limit of reservation in an
attempt to reconcile the apparently conflicting claims of equality and
excellence. We may make it clear that this outer limit fixed by us will
be subject to any reduction or attenuation which may be made by the
Indian Medical Council which is the statutory body of medical
practitioners whose functional obligations include setting standards for
medical education and providing for its regulation and coordination. We
are of the opinion that this outer limit fixed by us must gradually over
the years be progressively reduced but that is a task which would have
to be performed by the Indian Medical Council. We would direct the
Indian Medical Council to consider within a period of nine months from
today whether the outer limit of 70% fixed by us needs to be reduced
and if the Indian Medical Council determines a shorter outer limit, it will
be binding on the States and the Union Territories. We would also direct
the Indian Medical Council to subject the outer limit so fixed to
reconsideration at the end of every three years but in no event should
the outer limit exceed 70% fixed by us. The result is that in any event
at least 30% of the open seats shall be available for admission of
students on all-India basis irrespective of the State or university from
which they come and such admissions shall be granted purely on merit
on the basis of either all-India entrance examination or entrance
examination to be held by the State. Of course, we need not add that
even where reservation on the basis of residence requirement or
institutional preference is made in accordance with the directions given
in this judgment, admissions from the source or sources indicated by
such reservation shall be based only on merit, because the object must
be to select the best and most meritorious students from within such
source or sources."
(emphasis supplied)
51. This Court then distinguished admission to the MBBS course (at
the UG level) and the MD course (at the PG level). It observed that at
the PG level, merit cannot be compromised since compromising the
standard of medical facilities would be detrimental to national interest.
The Court referred to the submissions of the Medical Education Review
22)
"22. .'all admissions to the postgraduate courses in any
institution should be open to candidates on an all-India basis and
there should be no
restriction regarding domicile in the State/Union Territory in which the
institution is located'."
The policy statement filed by the Government of India was as follows :
"22.
So far as admission to the institutions of postgraduate
colleges and special professional colleges is concerned, it should be
entirely on the basis of all-India merit subject to constitutional
reservations in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes."
52. Consequently, it was held that it would be desirable to not
provide reservation based on residence in PG medical courses, though
there shall be a maximum of 50% reservation based on institutional
preference. Therefore, a doctor who has passed the MBBS course from a
certain college may be given preference in the same college for
692-93, para 22)
"22.
We are therefore of the view that so far as admissions to
postgraduate courses, such as MS, MD and the like are concerned, it
would be eminently desirable not to provide for any reservation
based on residence requirement within the State or on institutional
preference. But, having regard to broader considerations of equality
of opportunity and institutional continuity in education which has its
own importance and value, we would direct that though residence
requirement within the State shall not be a ground for reservation in
admissions to postgraduate courses, a certain percentage of seats
may in the present circumstances, be reserved on the basis of
institutional preference in the sense that a student who has passed
MBBS course from a medical college or university, may be given
preference for admission to the postgraduate course in the same
medical college or university but such reservation on the basis of
institutional preference should not in any event exceed 50% of the
total number of open seats available for admission to the
postgraduate course."
(emphasis supplied)
The observations were to guide both medical and dental courses in
State-run institutions.
53. The Bench in Pradeep Jain clarified its decision in Dinesh Kumar
(1)3. It was observed by the Bench that the admission to the AIQ quota
seats (30% in UG and 50% in PG) shall only be through a uniform all-
India examination. The suggestion of the Union Government that the
admission to the AIQ seats in UG and PG medical courses could be
made through marks received in the individual qualifying examinations
"4.
It would be wholly unjust to grant admissions to students
assessing their relative merits with reference to the marks obtained
by
them, not at the same qualifying examination where standard of
judging would be reasonably uniform but at different qualifying
examinations held by different State Governments or universities where
the standard of judging would necessarily vary and not be the same.
That would be blatantly violative of the concept of equality enshrined in
Article 14 of the Constitution."
54. Further, the Bench also clarified the demarcation of seats for the
AIQ. It was observed that 30% of the total number of seats were not
demarcated for AIQ. Rather, after deducting the seats filled by
reservation, 30% of the remaining seats are reserved for AIQ. As an
example, if there are 100 seats available, of which 30% of the seats are
reserved for SC and ST (that is, 30 seats), 30% of the remaining seats
(that is, 21 of the remaining 70 seats) must be filled by the AIQ. It was
"5. We would also like to clear up one misunderstanding which
seems to prevail with some State Governments and universities in
regard to the true import of our judgment dated 22-6-19842. They
have misinterpreted our judament to mean that 30% of the total
number of seats available for admission to MBBS course in a medical
college should be kept free from reservation on the basis of
residence requirement or institutional preference. That is a total
misreading of our judgment. What we have said in our judgment is
that after providing for reservation validly made, whatever seats
remain available for non-reserved categories, 30% of such seats at
the least, should be left free for open competition and admission to
such 30% open seats should not be based on residence requirement
or institutional preference but students from all over the country
should be able to compete for admissions to such 30% open seats.
To take an example, suppose there are 100 seats in a medical
college or university and 30% of the seats are validly reserved for
candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
That would leave 70 seats available for others belonging to non-
reserved categories. According to our judgment, 30% of 70 seats,
that is, 21 seats out of 70 and not 30% of the total number of 100
seats, namely, 30 seats, must be filled up by open competition
regardless of residence requirement or institutional preference."
(emphasis in original)
55. Pursuant to the directions given by the Bench in Dinesh Kumar
(1)3, the Medical Council of India formulated a scheme for holding an
all-India medical entrance examination for admission to the AIQ seats
in UG and PG. However, difficulties arose in the implementation of the
scheme. This Court thought it necessary to iron out the creases and by
an order dated 16-9-1985, directed the Government of India, in the
Ministry of Health to convene a meeting of the Deans of Medical
Colleges, representatives of the Medical Council of India and Dental
Council of India. A revised scheme was formulated and submitted to
this Court for approval.
56. Various State Governments raised objections to the revised
scheme before a two-Judge Bench in Dinesh Kumar (2) V. Motilal Nehru
Medical College4. The State of Tamil Nadu submitted that since the
total percentage of reservation varies in different States, if the AIQ
seats are calculated after deducting the seats in which reservations are
validly made, the total AIQ seats in a medical college in the State
would be inversely proportional to the percentage of reservation in the
State. This Court addressed this submission and observed that it would
then be open to the State Governments to reduce the number of seats
available in the AIQ by increasing the percentage of reservation in the
State. Therefore, this Court altered the formula for seat matrix adopted
in Pradeep Jain and clarified in Dinesh Kumar (1)3. This Court held
that for UG, 15% of the total seats in each medical college or institution
shall be demarcated for AIQ (as per the revised scheme of the Central
Government), without taking into account any reservation validly made.
For PG, it was held that 25% of the total seats would be reserved for
the AIQ, without taking into account reservation validly made. It was
5)
"5.
There can be no doubt that if in each State, 30% of the
seats were to be made available for admission on the basis of all-
India entrance examination after taking into account reservations
validly made, the number of seats which would be available for
admission on the basis of all-India entrance examination would vary
inversely with the percentage of reservations validly made in that
State. If the percentage of reservations is high as in the State of
Tamil Nadu or the State of Karnataka, the number of seats available
for admission on the basis of all-India entrance examination would
be relatively less than what would be in a State where the
percentage of reservations is low. There would thus be total
inequality in the matter of making available seats for admission on
the basis of all-India entrance examination. It would be open to a
State Government to reduce the number of seats available for
admission on the basis of all-India entrance examination by
increasing the number of reserved categories or by increasing the
percentage of reservations. We therefore agree with the Government
of India that the formula adopted by us in our main judgment dated
22-6-19842 for determining the number of seats which should be
made available for admission on the basis of all-India entrance
examination should be changed. We would direct, in accordance with
the suggestion made in the scheme by the Government of India,
that not less than 15% of the total number of seats in each medical
college or institution, without taking into account any reservations
validly made, shall be filled on the basis of all-India entrance
examination. This new formula is in our opinion fair and just and
brings about real equality of opportunity in
admissions to the MBBS/BDS course without placing the students in
one State in an advantageous or disadvantageous position as compared
to the students in another State. The same formula must apply also in
regard to admissions to the postgraduate courses and instead of
making available for admission on all-India basis 50% of the open seats
after taking into account reservations validly made, we would direct
that not less than 25% of the total number of seats without taking into
account any reservations, shall be made available for being filled on the
basis of all-India entrance examination. This suggestion of the
Government of India deserves to be accepted and the objection to it
must be overruled."
(emphasis supplied)
57. As opposed to the clarification issued in Dinesh Kumar (1)3,
where reservation based on residence was against the total seats
available after reservation made for backward classes under Article 15,
Dinesh Kumar (2)4 applies reservation based on residence against the
total number of seats available without excluding the reserved seats.
58. In R. Rajeshwaran17, the respondent filed a writ petition before
the Madras High Court seeking a direction to the Union of India to
provide reservation for the SC and ST categories in the AIQ seats set
aside for MBBS and BDS courses. The Madras High Court prima facie
observed that there was no specific order by this Court not to apply
reservation as under Article 15 in the AIQ seats. It was further
observed that the AIQ seats were demarcated only to overcome
reservation based on residence. The Madras High Court allowed the writ
petition directing the Central Government to provide 15% reservation
for SC and ST in the AIQ seats. The Union of India filed an appeal
against the order of the Madras High Court.
59. This Court in appeal referring to the judgment in Dinesh Kumar
(2)4 observed that since this Court has settled the scheme, it would not
be appropriate to determine if the candidates of SC and ST categories
are entitled to reservation in the AIQ seats since : (i) each State will
have different categories of SC and ST, and the Central list would also
vary making it difficult to adjust seats; and (ii) States anyway provide
reservation for SC and ST categories in the 85% seats demarcated for
paras 7-8)
"7. In respect of undergraduate course, the scheme works out like
this. If a State has a total of 100 seats and in that State 15% of the
seats are reserved for Scheduled Castes and 10% for Scheduled
Tribes, the State will fill up 15% seats for Scheduled Caste
candidates and 10% for Scheduled Tribe candidates, of the
remaining 75 seats 60 seats will be filled by the State Government
as unreserved and 15 seats will be earmarked for the all-India quota.
8. Inasmuch as 15% all-India quota has been earmarked under
the scheme framed by this Court and that scheme itself provides the
manner in which the same should be worked out, we do not think, it
would be appropriate to travel outside the said provisions to find out
whether a person in the position of the petitioner would be entitled
to plead in the manner sought for because each of the States could
also provide for reservation for the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
Tribe category in respect of 85% of the seats available with them. If
we meddle with this quota fixed, we are likely to land in innumerable
and insurmountable difficulties. Each State will have different
categories of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the Central
Government may have a different category and hence adjustment of
seats would become difficult. The direction fixing 15% quota for all-
India basis takes note of reservations and hence the High Court need
not have made any further directions."
60. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Saurabh Chaudri²0, decided
on the constitutional validity of reservation based on domicile and
institutional preference in admission to PG courses in government-run
medical colleges. This Court held that there was no reason to depart
from the ratio laid down in Pradeep Jain² that reservation based on
institutional preference and residence in PG courses is constitutionally
valid. The ratio of Pradeep Jain was referred to and the Court
"70. We, therefore, do not find any reason to depart from the ratio
laid down by this Court in Pradeep Jain². The logical corollary of our
finding is that reservation by way of institutional preference must be
held to be not offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India."
The Constitution Bench in Saurabh Chaudri case20 , also increased the
total per cent of AIQ seats from 25% [as held in Dinesh (2)4. to 50% of
the seats reasoning that the situation has improved to a great extent
and that the country has produced numerous PG doctors with the
passage of time.
61. In Buddhi Prakash Sharma V. Union of India4 the writ
petitioners challenged the communication issued by the Directorate
General of Health Services ("DGHS") on 7-12-2004 directing the States
to provide information on the total number of PG medical seats under
the 50% AIQ seats after excluding the seats reserved for SC and ST
categories. By an order dated 21-2-200545 this Court directed the
States to provide the total number of seats in PG medical courses,
without any exclusion. This Court observed that the DGHS was not
permitted to change the basis of the seat distribution by identifying the
AIQ seats after applying reservation for the SC and ST
categories. This Court observed that the total seats in AIQ would be
50% of the total number of available seats, without any exclusion. It
"3.
It is not in dispute that till 2004-2005 when all-India quota
of seats was 25%, the number of postgraduate seats was worked out
on the basis of total seats without any exclusion. It is because of the
letter dated 7-12-2004 requiring the information about 50% of all-
India quota after excluding the reserved seats that this mess has
been created. None permitted DGHS to change the basis this year.
The result of communication is that in many States the total number
of postgraduate seats has gone down than what it was when the all-
India percentage was 25% instead of it being almost double since
the direction of this Court was that from this academic year it would
be 50%.
4. From the material placed before us, it is evident that some of
the States have not furnished the requisite information to DGHS. We
direct that the total number of postgraduate seats on all-India basis
would be 50% of the total number of seats without any exclusion
and the calculation of seats would be done on the same basis which
was adopted when all-India quota was 25%. The Chief Secretaries of
States/Union Territories, who have not supplied the requisite
information to DGHS on this basis, are directed to supply the same
latest by 5.00 p.m. on 1-3-2005 and file a compliance affidavit in
this Court. Failure to supply the information would be seriously
viewed as a violation of this Court's direction by the Chief Secretaries
concerned. The counselling will commence on the dates already
announced as we have no doubt that entire information about
availability of the seats would be furnished by all concerned to
DGHS."
(emphasis supplied)
62. In Jayakumar18, an appeal was filed before this Court against
the judgment of the Madras High Court in a public interest litigation
("PIL") seeking reservation for SC and ST candidates in the 15% AIQ
seats in the UG medical course. The Madras High Court disposed of the
PIL observing that reservation was a constitutional mandate and that
the Government could implement reservation in the AIQ seats in the
future. This Court allowed the appeal in terms of the decision in
Rajeshwaran¹7 where it was held that there shall be no reservation for
"6. In our considered opinion, the question has been directly
considered in the decision of this Court in R. Rajeshwaran¹1, referred
to supra, and it has been indicated as to how incongruous it would
be, if the provisions of reservation be made applicable to the seats
meant for being filled up on the basis of all-India entrance
examination. Following the judgment of this Court in R.
Rajeshwaran¹7 as well as in Dinesh Kumar (2)4 we hold that
the High Court was wholly in error in observing that the requirement of
reservation should also apply to the seats to be filled up on the basis of
all-India entrance examination."
In Abhay Nath5 the Union of India sought clarification of the
order passed in Buddhi Prakash Sharma44 wherein it was held that the
50% seats for AIQ seats shall exclude reservation. A three-Judge Bench
reviewed the order and held that there may be reservation for the SC
and ST students in the AIQ. The order of this Court was as follows :
"1. This Court in Pradeep Jain V. Union of India ² directed that out
of the postgraduate seats to be filled up by the various colleges in
India, 50% of the seats shall be admitted on the basis of all-India
entrance examination. It was directed that out of the total number of
seats, 50% of the open seats shall be filled up by all-India entrance
examination.
2. Thereafter in Dinesh Kumar (1) V. Motilal Nehru Medical
'5.
That is a total misreading of our judgment. What we have
said in our judgment is that after providing for reservation *validly
made*, whatever seats remain available for non-reserved
categories, 30% of such seats at the least, should be left free for
open competition and admission to such 30% open seats should
not be based on residence requirement or institutional preference
but students from all over the country should be able to compete
for admissions to such 30% open seats. To take an example,
suppose there are 100 seats in a medical college or university and
30% of the seats are validly reserved for candidates belonging to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. That would leave 70
seats available for others belonging to non-reserved categories.
According to our judgment, 30% of 70% seats, that is, 21 seats
out of 70 and not 30% of the total number of 100 seats, namely,
30 seats, must be filled up by open competition regardless of
residence requirement or institutional preference."
3. And in Dinesh Kumar (2) V. Motilal Nehru Medical College4, it
'5.
that not less than 25% of the total number of seats
without taking into account any reservations, shall be made
available for being filled on the basis of all-India entrance
examination. This suggestion of the Government of India deserves
to be accepted and the objection to it must be overruled.'
4. In Saurabh Chaudri V. Union of India 20 the percentage of seats
to all-India entrance examination was increased to 50%.
5. Another writ petition was filed in this Court in Buddhi Prakash
Sharma V. Union of India44 In this writ petition an order was passed
by this Court on 28-2-200544 wherein it was stated that the total
number of postgraduate seats on all-India basis would be worked
out on the basis of 50% of the total number of seats without any
exclusion. The order indicated that out of 50% that are allocated are
to be admitted by all-India entrance examination and it was made
clear that there shall not be any seats excluded on reservation.
6. The Additional Solicitor General pointed out that in the all-India
quota of 50% seats, if 22.5% are reserved for SC/ST students, it
would be difficult for the State to give the entire percentage to
reservation out of the 50% seats left for them to be filled up. It is
equally difficult for DGHS to have the entire 22.5% reservation out of
the 50% of the seats allotted to be admitted in the all-India
entrance examination. Therefore, it is suggested that the Union of
India has decided to provide 22.5% reservation for SC/ST candidates
in all-India quota from the academic year 2007-2008 onwards.
7. The Union of India seeks clarification of the order passed in
Buddhi Prakash Sharma V. Union of India44 passed on 28-2-2005, to
the effect that 50% seats for all-India quota shall exclude the
reservation. We review that order and make it clear that the 50% of
the seats to be filled up by all-India entrance examination shall
include the reservation to be provided for SC/ST students. To that
extent the order passed on 28-2-200544 is clarified."
(emphasis supplied)
64. In Gulshan Prakash V. State of Haryana21, a writ petition was
filed seeking to quash the prospectus issued by Maharishi Dayanand
University, Rohtak, Haryana for the academic session 2007-2008 to the
extent that it did not provide any reservation of seats for SC and ST
candidates. One of the contentions raised by the petitioners was that
this Court in Abhay Nath5 had directed that reservation for SC and ST
candidates be provided in PG medical courses. However, the three-
Judge Bench in Gulshan Prakash clarified that the directions in Abhay
Nath5 would be applicable only to AIQ seats and would have no bearing
on admissions in the State quota for the PG course. It was further
clarified that if the State of Haryana has decided to not provide
reservation in PG medical courses for seats in the State quota, this
Court cannot direct the State to provide such reservation.
"29. Inasmuch as the Government of Haryana has not prescribed
any reservation for the postgraduate courses, neither the University
nor any other authority can be blamed for approving and publishing
the prospectus which does not contain reservation for postgraduate
courses. The clarificatory order of this Court in Abhay Nath5
is
applicable for the institutes managed/run by the Central Government
and unless the State Government takes any decision for granting
reservation in MD/MS/PG diploma and MDS courses, it cannot be
made applicable. As the State Government is competent to make the
reservation to a particular class or category, until it is decided by the
State, as being a policy matter, there cannot be any direction to
provide reservation at the PG level. The State of Haryana has
explained that reservation in undergraduate medical courses is being
provided strictly as per their policy. The postgraduate
degree/diploma in medical education is governed by the Medical
Council. Even the Medical Council of India has not followed strict
adherence to the rule of reservation policy in admission for SC/ST
category at the postgraduate level."
66. Having traced the evolution of the AIQ in UG and PG medical and
dental courses, we answer the following questions:
66.1. (i) Whether this Court in Pradeep Jain held that the AIQ seats
that were to be filled by an open all-India examination should be free of
reservation for the socially and educationally backward classes, and SC
and ST as enabled by Article 15(4).
66.2. (ii) Whether reservation in the AIQ can be provided only
pursuant to a direction of this Court.
67. This Court in Pradeep Jain² was deciding on the constitutional
validity of reservation based on domicile/residence. Having held that
residence-based reservation is constitutionally valid, the next question
that this Court was tasked with was adjudicating the quantum of
residence-based reservation that could be permitted. Referring to the
decision of this Court in Jagadish Saran V. Union of it was held
that there cannot be wholesale reservation (that is, 100% reservation).
It was observed that a certain percentage of seats must be filled by
open merit by an all-India examination without reservation based on
residence. The Medical Education Review Committee had suggested
that 75% of the seats in a medical college shall be reserved for
residents of the State. This Court decided that it would be fair to
reserve 70% of the seats for residents of the State. Therefore, 30% of
the seats were to be filled through an all-India examination. This would
mean that candidates from all across the country could compete
against the 30% seats available in State-run medical colleges. In this
context, this Court had observed, "such reservation should in no event
exceed the outer limit of 70% of the total number of open seats after
taking into account other kinds of reservations validly made" (para 21).
"21.
at least 30% of the open seats shall be available for
admission of students on all-India basis irrespective of the State or
university from which they come and such admissions shall be
granted purely on merit on the basis of either all-India entrance
examination or entrance examination to be held by the State."
The observation of this Court that AIQ seats must be filled purely on
the basis of merit, cannot be interpreted to mean that there shall be no
reservations in the AIQ seats. As noted in Section D-1 of this judgment
(paras 26 to 42), merit must be socially contextualised and
reconceptualised according to its distributive consequences where it
furthers substantive equality in terms of Articles 15(4) and 15(5) of the
Constitution. The reference to merit in para 21 of the judgment must
be read with the previous observations made in the judgment.
Identifying the issue before this Court, P.N. Bhagwati, J. writing for a
three-Judge Bench formulated the following question : (Pradeep Jain
"1.
The question is, whether, consistently with the
constitutional values, admissions to a medical college or any other
institution of higher learning situate in a State can be confined to
those who have their "domicile" within the State or who are resident
within the State for a specified number of years or can any
reservation in admissions be made for them so as to give them
precedence over those who do not possess "domicile" or residential
qualification within the State, irrespective of merit."
(emphasis supplied)
68. While discussing the constitutional validity of domicile-
reservation, it was observed that selection of candidates for admission
based on the all-India open examination would further merit since it
would permit the selection of the "best minds in the country". In this
context, it was observed that claims that would weigh with this Court in
justifying the departure from the principle of merit-based selection
are : (i) claim of State interest, where the students by view of their
residence are expected to settle down and serve their State; and (ii)
the regions' claim of backwardness (para 16). Further, it was observed
that though theoretically, admissions in medical colleges should be
based on an all-India examination since it would further merit and
would provide equality of opportunity to candidates across the country,
keeping in view the differing levels of social, economic, and educational
development in different areas, factual equality would not be attained.
Therefore, the observation in para 21 of
the judgment that the AIQ seats shall be filled through an all-India
examination purely on merit, must be interpreted only with reference to
the discussion made on residence-based reservation and the necessity
of an all-India examination for admission to medical and dental
courses. References to "merit" must therefore be read in the context of
merit vis-à-vis residence reservation. This is further evident from the
observation in para 21 of the judgment where it was observed that :
"21.
at least 30% of the open seats shall be available for
admission of students on all-India basis irrespective of the State or
university from which they come and such admissions shall be
granted purely on merit on the basis of either all-India entrance
examination or entrance examination to be held by the State".
(emphasis supplied)
69. The Bench thought it fit that admission through an all-India
entrance examination would further merit, enabling the best minds all
over the country to study medicine. The observations of the Bench
extracted below also aid the interpretation that we have arrived at :
"10.
The philosophy and pragmatism of universal excellence
through equality of opportunity for education and advancement
across the nation is part of our founding faith and constitutional
creed. The effort must, therefore, always be to select the best and
most meritorious students for admission to technical institutions and
medical colleges by providing equal opportunity to all citizens in the
country and no citizen can legitimately, without serious detriment to
the unity and integrity of the nation, be regarded as an outsider in
our constitutional set-up. Moreover, it would be against national
interest to admit in medical colleges or other institutions giving
instruction in specialities, less meritorious students when more
meritorious students are available, simply because the former are
permanent residents or residents for a certain number of years in the
State while the latter are not, though both categories are citizens of
India. Exclusion of more meritorious students on the ground that
they are not resident within the State would be likely to promote
substandard candidates and bring about fall in medical competence,
injurious in the long run to the very region. 'It is no blessing to
inflict quacks and medical midgets on people by wholesale sacrifice
of talent at the threshold. Nor can the very best be rejected from
admission because that will be a national loss and the interests of no
region can be higher than those of the nation.' The primary
consideration in selection of candidates for admission to the medical
colleges must, therefore, be merit. The object of any rules which
may be made for regulating admissions to the medical colleges must
be to secure the best and most meritorious students."
70. This aspect was further clarified by the Bench in Dinesh Kumar
(1)3 where this Court observed that the Union Government and the
Medical Council for India had not taken any initiative to conduct an all-
India entrance examination for admissions to the AIQ seats. The
suggestion that admission to the AIQ could be made based on the
marks obtained in the qualifying examination held by different States
or/and universities was rejected on the ground that the standard of
assessment would not be uniform. It is thus evident that the intention
of this Court in Pradeep Jain in creating an AIQ was solely to provide
candidates from across the country the opportunity to study medicine
in colleges in other parts of the country as well, owing to the unequal
number of medical colleges (and opportunities) in different States.
71. Reference was made to reservation of backward classes only for
the limited purpose of determining the seat matrix. The observation in
para 21 in Pradeep Jain on the calculation of seat matrix was clarified
in Dinesh Kumar (1)3. The Bench had clarified that after reservations
(for the SC, ST and OBC provided by the States) validly made, 30% of
the remaining seats would be reserved for AIQ. The graphical
representation of the demarcation is as under:
Reserved category
Remaining seats (open category)
SC/ST
AIQ
State Quota (Figure 1)
(Figure 1)
72. Therefore, according to the clarification in Dinesh Kumar (1)3 on
the demarcation of seats, the first bifurcation should be between
reserved and non-reserved seats, and the seats remaining in the open
category must be bifurcated into State quota and AIQ. It was thus, a
threefold vertical reservation, with the reserved category not being
considered within either the AIQ or the State quota. The logical fallacy
of this method of demarcation of seats is that different States provide
varying percentages of reservation. Therefore, the total percentage of
unreserved seats would inversely depend on the percentage of
reservation provided by the State. The State of Tamil Nadu raised this
objection in Dinesh Kumar (2)4. Pursuant to this, it was held that the
AIQ seats shall be determined without excluding any reservation validly
made. The seats were first bifurcated to State quota and AIQ, and the
vertical and horizontal
reservations (for example, for persons with disabilities) were
accommodated within the State quota. The revised seat matrix is
graphically represented below:
State Quota
AIQ
SC
ST
OBC
General Category
(Figure 2)
73. When the judgment in Dinesh Kumar (2)4 was pronounced, the
Union Government had not yet made any decision on providing
reservation in AIQ seats. It was subsequently in 2009 that the Union
Government had taken a policy decision to provide reservation for the
SC and ST categories in the AIQ. It is important to note that in
Jayakumar and Rajeshwaran¹7, the petitioners had sought a direction
from this Court for providing reservation in the AIQ seats. In
Rajeshwaran this Court declined to ascertain if a person would be
entitled to reservation in the AIQ seats. It was observed that if
reservations for SC and ST categories are to be provided in the AIQ
seats, it would cause difficulty in adjusting seats since the State and
the Central lists would differ. However, when the Union Government
submitted before this Court in Abhay Nath5 that it had taken the
decision to reserve seats in the AIQ, it was clarified that there was no
impediment against the implementation of such reservation.
74. In Buddhi Prakash Sharma44, there was a slight deviation from
the settled jurisprudence. This Court had held that the total number of
PG seats in AIQ would be 50% of the total seats without any exclusion
for reservation. The Bench had interpreted the observation in Dinesh
Kumar (2)4 that the AIQ seats would be determined without excluding
reservations (as depicted by Figure 1) to mean that there would be no
reservation in the AIQ. Therefore, since, Pradeep Jain did not preclude
the AIQ seats from reservation, a three-Judge Bench in Abhay Nath5
clarified that the 50% AIQ seats in PG medical and dental seats would
be inclusive of reservation for SC and ST categories.
D.3. The Executive's power to introduce reservation in AIQ seats
75. We next address the argument of the petitioners that the Union
Government should have filed an application before this Court before
notifying reservations in the AIQ since the AIQ scheme is a creation of
this Court. We are unable to agree to this argument. The Union
Government in Abhay Nath had made a submission to this Court of its
intention to provide reservations in the AIQ for the SC and ST
candidates since until then in view of the confusion on demarcation of
the seat matrix, there was no clarity on whether reservations could be
provided in the AIQ. This Court in Abhay Nath5 clarified that
reservations are permissible in the AIQ seats. Therefore, the order in
Abhay Nath was only clarificatory in view of the earlier observations in
Buddhi Prakash Sharma44. Interpreting the order to mean that the
Union of India sought the permission of this Court before providing
reservation would amount to aiding an interpretation that would foster
judicial overreach. Therefore, the argument that the Union Government
should have approached this Court before notifying the reservations for
the OBC and EWS categories in the AIQ seats is erroneous.
76. In Abhay Nath5, the Union Government had apprised this Court
of its decision to provide reservation for the SC and ST categories in the
AIQ. It had then, as a policy decision decided to only provide
reservation for the SC and ST categories. Parliament enacted the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
in view of the enabling provision in Article 15(5). Section 3 stipulates
that there shall be 15% reservation for the SC, 7.5% reservation for the
ST, and 27% reservation for the OBC category in Central educational
institutions. A Constitution Bench in Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of
India46 upheld the constitutional validity of 27% reservation for the
OBC category provided under the 2006 Act. Though the 2006 Act would
not be applicable to the seats earmarked for AIQ in State-run
institutions since it would not fall within the definition of a Central
educational institution under the Act, the Union of India in view of
Article 15(5) has the power to provide reservations for OBCs in the AIQ
seats. It is not tenable for the States to provide reservation in the AIQ
seats since these seats have been "surrendered" to the Centre. It would
also lead to the anomaly highlighted in Dinesh Kumar (2) 4 since the
percentage of reservation provided by different States differ, which
would lead to an unequal percentage of seats available in the AIQ in
different States. This is also coupled with the fact that the SC, ST and
OBC lists are not uniform across States. Thus, it is the Union
Government's prerogative to introduce reservation in AIQ seats.
D.4. Changing the Rules of the Game
77. The impugned notice providing reservation for OBC and EWS
categories in the AIQ was issued on 29-7-2021, after the registration
for the examination had closed on 18-4-2021. It is the contention of
the petitioners that the rules of the examination could have only been
changed before the last date for registration. The petitioners argue that
the candidates registered for the exam having a particular seat matrix
in mind and that the change in the seat matrix after registration would
be arbitrary. However, the Union Government has argued that Clause
11 in the Information Bulletin released by the National Board of
Examinations during the registration process provided that information
regarding seat matrix would be separately released by the counselling
authority.
78. Clause 11 reads as follows:
"11.1. Reservation of PG seats shall be as per the norms of the
Government of India and respective State Governments as may be
applicable.
11.2. A separate handbook informing details of the counselling
process and applicable reservation shall be released by the
designated counselling authority for NEET-PG 2021."
It is evident from a reading of Clause 11.2 that applicants are informed
of the seat matrix (that is, the applicable reservation) only when a
separate handbook is released by the counselling authority. The
candidates would possess no knowledge of the seat matrix at the time
of registration.
79. In K. Manjusree V. State of A.P. 47 , the selection of candidates to
ten vacant posts of District and Sessions Judges (Grade II) in the
Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service was the subject-matter of
the appeal. The selection and appointments to the post of District and
Sessions Judges (Grade II) are governed by the Andhra Pradesh State
Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1958. The Rules prescribe that one-third
of the posts are to be filled by direct recruitment. However, the method
of recruitment is not prescribed in the Rules. Therefore, the High Court
determines the method of selection when the vacancies are notified. An
advertisement was issued on 28-5-2004 calling for applications. The
Administrative Committee by its resolution dated 30-11-2004 decided
to conduct a written examination for seventy-five marks and an
interview for twenty-five marks, and prescribed minimum category
marks for the written examination. The exam was held on 30-1-2005.
The results were declared on 24-2-2005. The merit list was prepared by
aggregating the marks obtained in the written examination out of 100
and the interview for 25 marks. However, the Full Court did not agree
with the selection list and another Committee of Judges was
constituted to prepare the list. The Committee was
of the view that the select list changed the proportion of marks of the
written exam to the interview from 3 : 1 to 4 : 1 since the written exam
marks (out of 100) were not converted to 75 marks. The Sub-
Committee also directed that there must be minimum marks for the
interview component, in the same cut-off percentage as applied to the
written test component. Another selection list was prepared based on
the revised selection criteria. Candidates whose names were featured in
the first select list but were absent in the second list, challenged the
second selection list.
47
80. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in K. Manjusree case ,
held
that the scaling down of marks in the written exam in proportion to the
maximum of 75 marks was valid since it was in consonance with the
resolution dated 30-11-2004. However, it was observed that
introducing minimum marks in the interview component "after the
entire selection process (consisting of written examination and
interview) was completed, would amount to changing the rules of the
p. 524, para 27) The facts in K. Manjusree4 differ from the factual
matrix before us since the impugned notice notifying reservation in the
AIQ was introduced even before the examination was held. Further,
unlike the case before us, there was in that case, a change in the
selection criteria.
81. In Maharashtra SRTC V. Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve48 , the
selection to the post of drivers and conductors was in question. The writ
petitioners satisfied the qualifications and possessed the requisite
experience. A total of 12.5% marks was initially allotted to the personal
interview component. However. a change in the criteria for selection
was introduced after the driving test was conducted. This Court then
held that the new criteria was invalid since it proposed to change the
rules of the game after the game had begun. In Umrao Singh V. Punjabi
University49, this Court held that the selection norms for selection to
the posts of lecturers could not have been relaxed after the last date for
making the application and after the process for selection had started.
82. In Tej Prakash Pathak V. Rajasthan High Court50, the Rajasthan
High Court had called applications for the post of "translators".
According to the Rajasthan High Court Staff Service Rules, 2002, 100
marks was prescribed for the written exam and 50 marks for the
personal interview. After the exam was conducted, 75% marks were
prescribed as the qualifying marks in the written examination.
Chelameswar, J. writing for a three-Judge Bench observed that
changing the "rules of the game" midstream or after the game has
been played is an "aspect of retrospective law-making power". This
Court held that the principle applied in Manjusree47, without further
scrutiny would not further public justice and efficient administration.
This Court referred the question
to a larger Bench in the following terms51 : (Tej Prakash Pathak case
"15. No doubt it is a salutary principle not to permit the State or
its instrumentalities to tinker with the "rules of the game" insofar as
the prescription of eligibility criteria is concerned as was done in C.
Channabasavaih V. State of Mysore52, etc. in order to avoid
manipulation of the recruitment process and its results. Whether
such a principle should be applied in the context of the "rules of the
game" stipulating the procedure for selection more particularly when
the change sought is to impose a more rigorous scrutiny for selection
requires an authoritative pronouncement of a larger Bench of this
Court. We, therefore, order that the matter be placed before the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders in this regard."
83. In Prerit Sharma V. Bilu B.S. , the Information Bulletin for NEET
-SS 2020 was issued on 3-8-2020. The examination was held on 15-9-
2020, and the results were declared on 25-9-2020. Clause 5.16 of the
Information Bulletin that was released when the registration process
had begun stipulated that there would be no reservation in the SS
courses. The Medical Counselling Committee issued the counselling
scheme for AIQ for NEET-SS course 2020-2021 in which it was
mentioned that there would be no reservation for the SS courses by
referring to the judgments of this Court in Preeti Srivastava and
Sandeep V. Union of India54 The counselling for the SS course was
postponed. The State of Tamil Nadu issued GOMS No. 462 dated 7-11-
2020 stipulating that 50% of the SS seats in government medical
colleges in the State of Tamil Nadu would be reserved for in-service
candidates. This Court observed that when the process for admissions
to the SS courses had begun, it was notified through the Information
Bulletin that there would be no reservation in the SS courses.
Therefore, it was held that reservation for in-service doctors shall not be
permitted for the current academic year.
84. The impugned notice providing reservation for the OBC and EWS
categories in the AIQ seats was issued after the registration had closed
but before the exam was conducted. Thus, it would not amount to
altering the rules of the game for the following reasons:
84.1. The judgments cited by the counsel for the petitioner on
"changing the rules of the game midway" referred to changes in the
selection criteria or the
procedure for selection. Those cases are distinguishable from the case
before us since the impugned notice did not alter the selection criteria.
84.2. The judgments referred to applied the principle of not
changing the rules of the game midway after the selection process (of
exams and interviews) was completed.
84.3. Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin specifies that the
reservation applicable would be notified by the counselling authority
before the beginning of the counselling process, unlike the facts in
Prerit Sharma53. The candidates while applying for NEET-PG are not
provided any information on the distribution of the seat matrix. Such
information is provided by the counselling authority only before the
counselling session is to begin.
E. Conclusion
85. In view of the discussion above we hold that the reservation for
OBC candidates in the AIQ seats for UG and PG medical and dental
courses is constitutionally valid for the following reasons:
85.1. Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are not an exception to Article 15(1),
which itself sets out the principle of substantive equality (including the
recognition of existing inequalities). Thus, Articles 15(4) and 15(5)
become a restatement of a particular facet of the rule of substantive
equality that has been set out in Article 15(1).
85.2. Merit cannot be reduced to narrow definitions of performance
in an open competitive examination which only provides formal equality
of opportunity. Competitive examinations assess basic current
competency to allocate educational resources but are not reflective of
excellence, capabilities and potential of an individual which are also
shaped by lived experiences, subsequent training and individual
character. Crucially, open competitive examinations do not reflect the
social, economic and cultural advantage that accrues to certain classes
and contributes to their success in such examinations.
85.3. High scores in an examination are not a proxy for merit. Merit
should be socially contextualised and reconceptualised as an
instrument that advances social goods like equality that we as a society
value. In such a context, reservation is not at odds with merit but
furthers its distributive consequences.
85.4. Articles 15(4) and 15(5) employ group identification as a
method through which substantive equality can be achieved. This may
lead to an incongruity where certain individual members of an identified
group that is being given reservation may not be backward or
individuals belonging to the non-identified group may share certain
characteristics of backwardness with members of an identified group.
The individual difference may be a result of privilege, fortune, or
circumstances but it cannot be used to negate the role of reservation in
remedying the structural disadvantage that certain groups suffer.
85.5. The scheme of AIQ was devised to allot seats in State-run
medical and dental institutions in which students from across the
country could compete. The observations in Pradeep Jain that the AIQ
seats must be filled by merit, must be read limited to merit vis-à-vis
residence reservation. This Court in Pradeep Jain did not hold that
reservation in AIQ seats is impermissible.
85.6. The Union of India filed an application before this Court in
Abhay Nath5 placing the policy decision of the Government to provide
reservation for the SC and ST categories in the AIQ seats since until
then in view of the confusion on demarcation of seat matrix, there was
no clarity on whether reservations could be provided in the AIQ seats.
The Union Government was not required to seek the permission of this
The surest way't legal research!
Court before providing reservation in AIQ seats. Therefore, providing
reservation in the AIQ seats is a policy decision of the Government,
which will be subject to the contours of judicial review similar to every
reservation policy.
85.7. It was clarified in Dinesh Kumar (2)4 that the total seats
demarcated for AIQ shall be determined without excluding reservation
as was earlier directed by Pradeep Jain and clarified in Dinesh Kumar
(1)3. However, this Court in Buddhi Prakash Sharma44 had erroneously
construed the clarification in Dinesh Kumar (2)4 to mean that there
should be no reservation in AIQ seats. Therefore, the order in Abhay
Nath5 was only clarificatory in view of the observations in Buddhi
Prakash Sharma44 44
85.8. Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin specifies that the
reservation applicable to NEET-PG would be notified by the counselling
authority before the beginning of the counselling process. Therefore,
the candidates while applying for NEET-PG are not provided any
information on the distribution of seat matrix. Such information is
provided by the counselling authority only before the counselling
session is to begin. It thus cannot be argued that the rules of the game
were set when the registration for the examination closed.
86. The challenge to the constitutional validity of OBC reservation in
AIQ seats introduced through the Notice dated 29-7-2021 is rejected in
view of the above discussion.
87. Pending application(s), if any, relating to the issue of OBC
reservation implemented through the Notice dated 29-7-2021 stand
disposed of.
+
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
1
2
3
5
6
WP No. 507 of 2020.
7
8
WP No. 8326 of 2020.
9
Saloni Kumari V. DG Health Services, WP (C) No. 596 of 2015 (SC)
11
12 SLP (C) No. 9286 of 2020.
13
14
Contempt Petition No. 181 of 2021.
15
17
18
19
20
22
23
Vol. VII, Constituent Assembly of India Debates, 30-11-1948, available at
<https://www.constitutionofindia.net/constitution_assembly_debates/volume/7/1948-11-
30>
24
Vol. IX, Constituent Assembly of India Debates, 23-8-1949, available at
<https://www.constitutionofindia.net/constitution_assembly_debates/volume/9/1949-8-23>
25
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649
25 M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, para 31
25
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, para 34
26
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179; C.A. Rajendran V.
Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507
27 T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179
28
28
29
1993 SC 477
30
31
K.V. Syamprasad, "Merit and caste as cultural capital : Justifying affirmative action for the
underprivileged in Kerala, India", Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, Vol. 17, pp. 50-
81 (2019).
31
K.V. Syamprasad, "Merit and caste as cultural capital : Justifying affirmative action for the
underprivileged in Kerala, India", Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, Vol. 17, pp. 50-
81 (2019).
32
33
Galanter M., Competing Equalities : Law and the Backward Classes in India, (Oxford
University Press, New Delhi 1984), cited by Deshpande S., "Inclusion versus excellence :
Caste and the framing of fair access in Indian higher education", 40 : 1 South African Review
of Sociology 127-147.
34 Michael Sandel, Tyranny of Merit : What's become of the Common Good (Penguin Books).
35
Ashwini Deshpande, "Social Justice Through Affirmative Action in India : An Assessment",
in Jeannette Wicks-Lim and Robert Pollin (Eds.) Capitalism on Trial : Explorations in the
Tradition of Thomas Weisskopf, (Publisher : Edward Elgar Publishing Inc., Northampton, MA,
2013).
36
Satish Deshpande, "Pass, Fail, Distinction : The Examination as a Social Institution",
Marjorie Sykes Memorial Lecture, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer, 3-3-2010, published
by the National Council for Educational Research and Training, New Delhi.
36
Satish Deshpande, "Pass, Fail, Distinction : The Examination as a Social Institution",
Marjorie Sykes Memorial Lecture, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer, 3-3-2010, published
by the National Council for Educational Research and Training, New Delhi.
38
39
The Advisory opinion on Minority Schools in Albania, 6-4-1935 publications of the Court,
Series A/B No. 64, p. 19.
40
Amartya Sen, "Merit and Justice" in Arrow K.J., et al (Eds.), Meritocracy and Economic
Inequality (Princeton University Press, 2000).
41
20
42
43
1972 AP 83
44
*
Ed. : The words between two asterisks have been emphasised in original.
46
48
49
50
51 The Bench noticed the judgment in State of Haryana V. Subash Chander Marwaha, (1974)
to not appoint all candidates who had secured the minimum percentage of marks.
52
C. Channabasavaih V. State of Mysore, AIR 1965 SC 1293
54