In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE VINEET SARAN AND ANIRUDDHA BOSE, JJ.)
NAHAR SINGH
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND ANOTHER
Respondents.
Criminal Appeal No. 443 of 2022 , decided on March 16, 2022
A. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 190(1)(b) r/w Ss. 173, 193 &
319 and Ss. 161 & 164 - Taking cognizance of offence on basis of police
report - Protest petition - Powers of Magistrate to summon person not
arraigned as an accused in police report and whose name also found not
featured in Column (2) of such report - Stages at which said power can be
exercised - Power of Magistrate to issue process to such person at stage of
cognizance itself, without waiting for S. 319 CrPC stage - Materials that
may be considered by Magistrate - Law summarised
- Even after process has been issued against some accused on one date,
held, process can still be issued by the Magistrate against some other
person against whom there is some material on record, but whose name is
not included as accused in the charge-sheet - Lastly, Magistrate or court
need not wait till stage of S. 319 CrPC to exercise such power
- In FIR lodged by victim's mother under Ss. 363, 366 and 376 IPC,
person concerned, being the appellant, neither named in FIR nor in the initial
statement of prosecutrix recorded by the police under S. 161 CrPC -
Investigation transferred at the instance of the accused persons who did
not have any locus standi to seek that the investigation be transferred from
one police station to another police station - However, on further
investigation witnesses re-examined under S. 161 CrPC pursuant to which
the charge-sheet submitted only against two persons, but not against the
appellant, and, thus, the Magistrate took cognizance only against these two
persons
- Subsequently, mother of the prosecutrix filed application seeking
summoning of the appellant on basis of statement of the prosecutrix
recorded under S. 164 CrPC, wherein she clearly implicated the appellant
and, thereafter, S. 376(g) IPC also added to the charge-sheet, but the IO
did not seriously attach any importance to the statement recorded under S.
164 CrPC before the court and proceeded to exonerate the appellant
- Held, if the Magistrate disagrees with the police report, he may act on
the basis of a protest petition that may be filed and commit the case to the
Court of Session - This power of the Magistrate is not exercisable only in
respect of persons whose names appear in Column (2) of the charge-sheet,
apart from those who are arraigned as accused in the police report - In
case of
availability of materials before the Magistrate showing complicity of persons other
than those arraigned as accused or named in Column (2) of the police report in
commission of an offence, the Magistrate at that stage could summon such
persons as well upon taking cognizance of the offence
- Further, for summoning persons upon taking cognizance of an offence,
the Magistrate has to examine the materials available before him for
coming to the conclusion that apart from those sent up by the police some
other persons are involved in the offence - These materials need not
remain confined to the police report, charge-sheet or the FIR, but a
statement made under S. 164 CrPC could also be considered for such
purpose
- Further held, there is no bar under S. 190 CrPC that once the process
is issued against some accused, on the next date, the Magistrate cannot
issue process to some other person against whom there is some material
on record, but his name is not included as accused in the charge-sheet -
There is, held, no merit in the contention that appellant being not named as
accused in the charge-sheet, he could only be summoned in exercise of
jurisdiction under S. 319 CrPC - Resultantly, impugned summoning order of
the Magistrate and affirmed by High Court, held, justified - Penal Code,
1860, Ss. 376, 363 and 366
B. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 190(1)(b) r/w Ss. 173, 193 &
319 and Ss. 161 & 164 - Taking cognizance of offence on basis of police
report - Protest petition - Powers of Magistrate to summon person not
arraigned as an accused in police report and whose name also found not
featured in Column (2) of such report - Materials that must be considered
- Scope of
- Magistrate, held, is required to examine the materials available before
him for coming to the conclusion that apart from those sent up by the police
some other persons are involved in the offence - Held, these materials
need not remain confined to the police report, charge-sheet or the FIR, but
a statement made under S. 164 CrPC could also be considered for such
purpose
C. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Ss. 190(1)(b) r/w 173, 193 and
319 - Taking cognizance of offence on basis of police report - Protest
petition - Summoning of person not arraigned as an accused in police
report and whose name also found not featured in Column (2) of such
report - Stages at which said power can be exercised - Power to issue
process by Magistrate to such person at stage of cognizance itself, without
waiting for S. 319 CrPC stage - Law clarified
- Contention raised that person concerned being not named as accused
in the charge-sheet, he could only be summoned in exercise of jurisdiction
under S. 319 CrPC - Held, irrespective of the fact as to whether cognizance
is taken by the Magistrate under S. 190 or jurisdiction exercised by the
Court of Session under S. 193 thereof, these judicial authorities would not
have to wait till the case reaches the stage when jurisdiction under S. 319 is
capable of being exercised for summoning a person as accused but not
named as such in police report
In the present case, before the High Court, apart from other points, it was
argued that exercise of jurisdiction by the CJM, under Section 190(1)(b) CrPC was
impermissible in the subject case. The appellant's case was that as he had not been
named as accused in the charge-sheet, he could only be summoned in exercise of
jurisdiction under Section 319 CrPC.
In the judgment under appeal, the High Court reiterated the well-established
principle of criminal jurisprudence that cognizance taken by the Magistrate is of an
offence and not of an offender. The High Court held that it was the duty of the
Magistrate to find out with respect to the complicity of any person apart from those
who were charge-sheeted by sifting the corroborative evidence on record. In case
the Magistrate came to the conclusion that there was clinching evidence supporting
the allegations made against persons who have not been charge-sheeted, it was his
duty to proceed against such persons as well by summoning them.
It was, inter alia, held by the High Court in the judgment under appeal:
"The summoning of additional accused person is an integral part of the
proceedings where allegations of facts constituting an offence is made out for
taking cognizance. At the time of taking cognizance, the Magistrate has only to
see whether prima facie there are cogent reasons for issuing the process. The
Magistrate is fully competent to take cognizance of an offence and there is no
bar under Section 190 CrPC that once the process is issued against some of the
accused persons, the Magistrate cannot issue process to some other person
against whom charge-sheet was not submitted and against whom there is some
material on record.
The investigation was transferred at the instance of the accused persons who
did not have any locus to direct the investigation to be transferred from one
police station to another police station. Only when the investigation was
transferred to another police station on further investigation the witnesses were
re-examined under Section 161 CrPC pursuant to which the charge-sheet was
submitted against Y and R. Section 376(g) IPC was also added after recording
the statement of the victim recorded under Section 164 CrPC which is a public
document but the investigating officer did not seriously show or attach any
importance to the statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC before the court
and proceeded to exonerate the applicant which clearly show the manner in
which the investigation was done by the investigating officer on the direction of
the SSP. The mere fact that the statement of the victim was subsequently
recorded will not overshadow the statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC.
The victim cannot be treated with suspicion or discredited that she had not
disclosed the complicity of the applicant in her statement under Section 161
CrPC."
Affirming the abovesaid ruling of the High Court, the Supreme Court
Held :
The power or jurisdiction of the court or Magistrate taking cognizance of an
offence on the basis of a police report to summon an accused not named in the
police report, before commitment has been analysed in various
decisions/authorities and the uniform view on this point, irrespective of the fact as
to whether cognizance is taken by the Magistrate under Section 190 CrPC or
jurisdiction exercised by the Court of Session under Section 193 thereof is that the
aforesaid judicial authorities would not have to wait till the case reaches the stage
when
jurisdiction under Section 319 CrPC is capable of being exercised for summoning a
person as accused but not named as such in police report. Such jurisdiction to issue
summons can be exercised even in respect of a person whose name may not
feature at all in the police report, whether as accused or in Column (2) thereof if the
Magistrate is satisfied that there are materials on record which would reveal prima
facie his involvement in the offence. None of the authorities limit or restrict the
power or jurisdiction of the Magistrate or Court of Session in summoning an
accused upon taking cognizance, whose name may not feature in the FIR or police
report.
(Para 29)
Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar, (1967) 2 SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC 1167; SWIL
In the present case, the name of the accused had transpired from the statement
made by the victim under Section 164 CrPC. In the event the Magistrate disagrees
with the police report, he may act on the basis of a protest petition that may be
filed and commit the case to the Court of Session. This power of the Magistrate is
not exercisable only in respect of persons whose names appear in Column (2) of
the charge-sheet, apart from those who are arraigned as accused in the police
report. In the subject proceeding, the Magistrate acted on the basis of an
independent application filed by the de facto complainant. If there are materials
before the Magistrate showing complicity of persons other than those arraigned as
accused or named in Column (2) of the police report in commission of an offence,
the Magistrate at that stage could summon such persons as well upon taking
cognizance of the offence. For summoning persons upon taking cognizance of an
offence, the Magistrate has to examine the materials available before him for
coming to the conclusion that apart from those sent up by the police some other
persons are involved in the offence. These materials need not remain confined to
the police report, charge-sheet or the FIR. A statement made under Section 164
CrPC could also be considered for such purpose.
(Para 30)
followed
Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar, (1967) 2 SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC 1167;
to
Turning to the facts of the present case, there is no error in the order of the
Magistrate, which was affirmed by the High Court. The Supreme Court accordingly
affirms the judgment under appeal.
(Para 31)
Pravin Chandra Mody V. State of A.P., (1965) 1 SCR 269 : AIR 1965 SC 1185
:
(1965) 2 Cri LJ 250, relied on
held, overruled
Lajya Ram, AIR 1966 SC 595 : 1966 Cri LJ 465 : (1966) 1 SCR 560, referred to
SK-D/68693/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Santosh Kr. Mishra, Ms Vineeta Singh and Prem Prakash (Advocate-
on-Record), Advocates, for the Appellant;
Rajan Kr. Chourasia, Sarvesh Singh Baghel (Advocate-on-Record)
and Apoorv Kurup (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates, for the
Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Balveer Singh V. State of Rajasthan
308d-e
300b, 303e-f, 303g-h,
U.P.
304e, 313c-d
of U.P.
313d
305a-b, 305b, 306c-d,
Dharam Pal V. State of Haryana
307c-d, 308a, 308d,
308d-e, 309c-d, 309f,
311d-e, 311e-f, 312a,
312c, 312d, 312g
Singh V. State of Punjab
308a, 309c-d, 312a, 312c
Kishori Singh V. State of Bihar
305b-c
Dharam Pal V. State of Haryana
305c, 305f-g, 306c
Prasad V. Bashir
305c
Ltd. V. State of Delhi
304e, 304f, 305c, 312d
305c-d, 305d, 305e-f,
Singh V. State of Punjab
306b-c, 307c
Kishore Prasad V. State of Bihar (held, overruled)
308c, 308d
State of U.P.
308c-d
Singh V. State of Bihar
308c-d, 308d, 308d-e,
310c, 310f-g, 310g,
311a, 313b
Satpathy V. Tikaram Agarwala
309c
15. (1967) 2 SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC 1167309a-b, 309c, 310c, 311e-
Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar
f, 311f, 312a, 312c,
312d, 313b
16. AIR 1966 SC 595 : 1966 Cri LJ 465 : (1966) 1
SCR 560, P.C. Gulati V. Lajya Ram
310f-g, 311b
17. (1965) 1 SCR 269 : AIR 1965 SC 1185 : (1965) 2
Cri LJ 250, Pravin Chandra Mody V. State of A.P.
310e
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J. - Leave granted. The question which we shall
be addressing in this appeal is whether a Magistrate taking cognizance
of an offence on the basis of a police report in terms of Section 190(1)
(b) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 ("the Code") can issue
summons to any person not arraigned as an accused in the police
report and whose name also does not feature in Column (2) of such
report. In this case the person concerned, being the appellant, was not
named in the first information report either. The High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad has opined on this question in the affirmative in
the judgment delivered on 14-5-2015- This judgment is under appeal
before us.
2. The Chief Judicial Magistrate ("CJM"), Bulandshahar, Uttar
Pradesh had taken cognizance of offences under Sections 363, 366 and
376 of the Penal Code, 1860 ("the 1860 Code") on 8-8-2012 on the
basis of police report. These are offences triable before a Court of
Session. The police report had named two individuals as accused,
Yogesh and Rupa [the spelling of the name of the latter has been
interchangeably used in different proceedings emanating from the first
information report ("FIR") as Roopa and Rupa]. The police report was
made on the basis of an FIR made by the mother of a lady victim
(prosecutrix) on 9-5-2012 in Police Station Chhatari, Sub-district
Shikarpur in the District of Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh. In this FIR,
she stated that on 4-5-2012, her minor daughter was enticed away by
said Yogesh and his two or three associates. Later on, a radiologist on
the basis of x-ray had found her to be a major, aged about 18 years.
But the age issue of the victim is not in controversy involved in this
appeal.
3. The investigating officer recovered the prosecutrix on 10-5-2012.
Her statement under Section 161 of the Code was recorded on 10th
May itself. In her statement, in substance, she stated that Yogesh had
committed rape upon her. The victim was, thereafter, produced before
the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bulandshahar and her
statement under Section 164 of the Code was recorded on 14-5-2012.
In that statement, she had disclosed the names of the accused Rupa,
Yogesh as also the appellant herein Nahar Singh, as the persons who
had committed rape upon her. Her statement, inter alia, was recorded
in the following terms:
"It is an incident of 2-5-2012. It was 12 o'clock in the day. I was
standing at the bus-stand at that time. Two persons Rupa and
Yogesh were standing there. Both of them forcibly took me to
Pahasu. Both of them telephoned Nahar Singh there. He came there
with a vehicle and all of them made me sit in that four wheeler
vehicle and took me from there to Khurja. After closing the vehicle
all of them took turns of rape on me. Thereafter, all of them
consumed liquor and also forcibly made me drink liquor by putting it
in Pepsi. Then again all of them forcibly raped me and threatened me
if
you may not live as wife of Yogesh we will ruin your family. These
people made me unconscious and dressed me in bangles, bichhia
and also
filled my maang and left me at Kamauna. I want to go with my father
and mother."
(quoted verbatim from the copy of the statement as annexed to
the paperbook)
4. In her initial statement recorded under Section 161 of the Code,
the name of Nahar Singh did not figure. The charge-sheet was
submitted subsequently, in which Yogesh and Rupa were arraigned as
accused persons. On 8-8-2012, the CJM, Bulandshahar took cognizance
of offence under Sections 363, 366 and 376 of the 1860 Code against
accused Yogesh and Rupa. The de facto complainant, being mother of
the victim thereafter had filed an application before the Court of the
CJM in Criminal Case No. 102 of 2012 praying for an order requiring
appearance of the appellant before the Court.
5. In this application, it was inter alia, stated:
"Accused Yogesh and Rupa are in judicial custody of the District
Jail. Accused Nahar Singh is not arrested. Accused Nahar Singh has
threatened the complainant and her family for number of times that
they may withdraw the case against him otherwise he will implicate
them in any false case. In this regard the complainant has submitted
application before the police officers for arrest of Nahar Singh and for
the safety and security of her family.
Thereafter, the investigation of this case is transferred from PS
Chhattari to PS Dibai. The investigating officer of PS Dibai didn't
conduct impartial investigation. Despite having sufficient evidence
against accused Nahar Singh the charge-sheet is not submitted and
the name of Nahar Singh is deleted whereas accused Rupa and
Nahar Singh have committed an offence of rape with XXXX against
her consent, as is evident from statement recorded under Sections
161 and 164 CrPC. There are sufficient grounds in the case diary to
summon accused Nahar Singh in the matter. The complainant and
her daughter had also given statement before the IO of PS Dibai for
commission of offence of rape by Nahar Singh. As per the provisions
of Section 190 CrPC the court takes cognizance for the offence and
not for the accused.
Therefore, it is prayed that this Hon'ble Court may pass an order
against accused Nahar Singh, son of Megh Singh, resident of Village
Waan, PS Chhattari to appear before the court. I shall be grateful to
you."
(quoted verbatim from the copy of the application as annexed to
the paperbook. Name of the victim has been masked with xxxx)
6. In an order passed on 7-11-2012, the CJM found that there was
no ground to summon the appellant for trial and the said application
was dismissed. The file was directed to be presented for commitment
on 16-11-2012. Against this order, the de facto complainant invoked
the revisional jurisdiction of the Sessions Judge. Her application was
registered as Criminal Revision No. 588 of 2012 and was listed before
Additional District and Sessions Judge Court
No. 1, Bulandshahar. We find from the order of the Revisional Court
passed on 13-1-2015 that investigation of this case was transferred
from the first investigating officer of Police Station Chhatari to the
Inspector in charge of Police Station, Dibai, Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav.
There was thus, change of the police station also. The charge-sheet was
submitted by the latter on the basis of which cognizance was taken. In
the aforesaid order, the sequence of events showing the trajectory of
the investigation was recorded by the Revisional Court in the following
manner:
"After the recovery of the daughter of the complainant the IO
recorded her statement on 10-5-2012 under Section 161 CrPC.
Accused XXXX mentioned the name of accused Yogesh only in her
statement whom she has stated to have induced and abducted her.
Thereafter, the statement of the abducted was recorded under
Section 164 CrPC on 14-5-2012 before the Magistrate wherein the
victim stated that other than Yogesh two more persons being Rupa
and Nahar Singh were involved in the offence. While mentioning the
aforesaid statement made under Section 164 CrPC on 19-5-2012 in
case diary the IO added Section 376(g) IPC as two more persons
being Rupa and Nahar Singh were implicated in the offence. Upon
adding Section 376(g) in the matter the then SHO Harish Vardhan
Singh took over the investigation and recorded the statements of the
brother of the victim Sonu, son of Shri Ramesh Chand, resident of
Village Waan and another person Boby, son of Babu Lal, resident of
Village Waan on 3-6-2012. Both the witnesses substantiated the
occurrence of incident. It appears from the perusal of records that on
an application of proposed accused Nahar Singh, the Superintendent
of Police, Bulandshahar transferred the investigation from Police
Station Chhattari to Police Station Dibai on 14-6-2012 and entrusted
the investigation to IO Ashok Kumar. The aforesaid Ashok Kumar
Yadav, the in-charge Inspector of Police Station Dibai, during the
investigation, again recorded the statements of victim XXXX, her
mother Smt Kamlesh, complainant under Section 161 CrPC and
concluded that Nahar Singh, son of Shri Megh Singh, resident of
Village Waan had no role in the abduction of XXXX nor he committed
any offence like rape with her. He was implicated by complainant
and the opposite party of Nahar Singh only due to enmity in the
village. As a result, the IO filed charge-sheet against the nominated
accused Yogesh and co-accused Rupa."
(quoted verbatim from the copy of the Revisional Court's
judgment as annexed to the paperbook. Name of the victim has
been masked with xxxx)
7. The Revisional Court set aside the order passed by the CJM on 7-
11-2012 by which the application of the de facto complainant was
rejected. The matter was remanded to the Court of the CJM and the
latter was directed to dispose of the said application in view of the
observations made in the judgment of the Revisional Court. It was also
observed in the order of the Revisional Court that
the Magistrate should pass a lawful order to summon the accused,
Nahar Singh in the matter. This order was passed on 13-1-2015.
8. Thereafter, the CJM heard the matter on remand and in an order
passed on 5-2-2015, Nahar Singh (the appellant) was directed to be
summoned for trial on 21-2-2015. This order of the CJM was challenged
by the appellant by filing a criminal revision petition before the
Sessions Judge, Bulandshahar. By a decision delivered on 20-4-2015,
the revisional application was dismissed. Against this order of
dismissal, the appellant approached the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad by filing a criminal miscellaneous writ petition bearing No.
11538 of 2015.
9. Before the High Court, apart from other points, it was argued that
exercise of jurisdiction by the CJM, under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code
was impermissible in the subject case. The appellant's case was that as
he had not been named as accused in the charge-sheet, he could only
be summoned in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 319 of the Code.
Such submissions have been recorded in the judgment under appeal.
10. Section 190 of the Code reads:
"190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.-(1) - Subject to
the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and
any Magistrate of the Second class specially empowered in this
behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence-
(a) Upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such
offence;
(b) Upon a police report of such facts;
(c) Upon information received from any person other than a
police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence has
been committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of
the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such
offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try."
11. In the judgment under appeal delivered on 14-5-20151, the
High Court reiterated the well-established principle of criminal
jurisprudence that cognizance taken by the Magistrate is of an offence
and not of an offender. The High Court held that it was the duty of the
Magistrate to find out with respect to the complicity of any person apart
from those who were charge-sheeted by sifting the corroborative
evidence on record. In case the Magistrate came to the conclusion that
there was clinching evidence supporting the allegations made against
persons who have not been charge-sheeted, it was his duty to proceed
against such persons as well by summoning them.
12. It was, inter alia, held by the High Court in the judgment under
"6. The summoning of additional accused person is an integral
part of the proceedings where allegations of facts constituting an
offence is made out for taking cognizance. At the time of taking
cognizance, the
Magistrate has only to see whether prima facie there are cogent reasons
for issuing the process. The Magistrate is fully competent to take
cognizance of an offence and there is no bar under Section 190 CrPC
that once the process is issued against some of the accused persons,
the Magistrate can not issue process to some other person against
whom charge-sheet was not submitted and against whom there is
some material on record. The investigation was transferred at the
instance of the accused persons who did not have any locus to direct
the investigation to be transferred from one police station to another
police station. Only when the investigation was transferred to another
police station on further investigation the witnesses were re-examined
under Section 161 CrPC pursuant to which the charge-sheet was
submitted against Yogesh and Roopa. Section 376(g) IPC was also
added after recording the statement of the victim recorded under
Section 164 CrPC which is a public document but the investigating
officer did not seriously show or attach any importance to the
statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC before the court and
proceeded to exonerate the applicant which clearly show the manner in
which the investigation was done by Sri Harsh Vardhan, the
investigating officer on the direction of the SSP Bulandshahar. The
mere fact that the statement of the victim was subsequently recorded
will not overshadow the statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC.
The victim cannot be treated with suspicion or discredited that she had
not disclosed the complicity of the applicant in her statement under
Section 161 CrPC."
(quoted verbatim from the copy of the impugned judgment as
annexed to the paperbook)
13. As regards the point of law with which we are dealing with in
this appeal, in the impugned judgment ¹, the High Court had relied on
decision of a Coordinate Bench of this Court in SWIL Ltd. V. State of
Delhi². In this decision, argument was advanced that under Section
190 of the Code, once process is issued against some accused, the
Magistrate cannot issue process to any other accused against whom
there might be materials on record. Such argument was repelled.
14. It was held by the Coordinate Bench in this case : (SWIL case²,
"7. Further, in the present case, there is no question of referring
to the provisions of Section 319 CrPC. That provision would come
into operation in the course of any enquiry into or trial of an offence.
In the present case, neither the Magistrate was holding enquiry as
contemplated under Section 2(g) CrPC nor had the trial started. He
was exercising his jurisdiction under Section 190 of taking
cognizance of an offence and issuing process. There is no bar under
Section 190 CrPC that once the process is issued against some
accused, on the next date, the Magistrate
cannot issue process to some other person against whom there is some
material on record, but his name is not included as accused in the
charge-sheet."
15. There was divergence of views of different Benches of this Court
on this point and ultimately the issue has been settled by a
Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal V. State of Haryana³. Before dealing
with the ratio of this decision, we shall narrate the journey of the legal
dispute to that stage, which has been recorded in the judgment of
1-5)
"1. This matter was initially directed to be heard by a Bench of
three Judges in view of the conflict of opinion in the decisions of two
two-Judge Benches, in Kishori Singh V. State of Bihar4, Rajinder
Prasad V. Bashir and SWIL Ltd. V. State of Delhi². When the matter
was taken up for consideration by the three-Judge Bench on 1-12-
2004 Dharam Pal V. State of Haryana6, it was brought to the notice
of the Court that two other decisions had a direct bearing on the
question sought to be determined. The first is Kishun Singh V. State
of Bihar and the other is a decision of a three-Judge Bench in
Ranjit Singh V. State of Punjab8
2. Ranjit Singh case disapproved the observations made in
Kishun Singh case which was to the effect that the Sessions Court
has power under Section 193 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973,
hereinafter referred to as "the Code", to take cognizance of an
offence and summon other persons whose complicity in the
commission of the trial could prima facie be gathered from the
materials available on record.
3. According to the decision in Kishun Singh case the Sessions
Court has such power under Section 193 of the Code. On the other
hand, in Ranjit Singh case8 it was held that from the stage of
committal till the Sessions Court reached the stage indicated in
Section 230 of the Code, that Court could deal only with the accused
referred to in Section 209 of the Code and there is no intermediary
stage till then enabling the Sessions Court to add any other person
to the array of the accused.
4. The three-Judge Bench 6 took note of the fact that the effect of
such a conclusion is that the accused named in Column 2 of the
charge-sheet and not put up for trial could not be tried by exercise of
power by the Sessions Judge under Section 193 read with Section
228 of the Code. In other words, even when the Sessions Court
applied its mind at the time of
framing of charge and came to the conclusion from the materials
available on record that, in fact, an offence is made out against even
those who are shown in Column 2, it has no power to proceed against
them and has to wait till the stage under Section 319 of the Code is
reached to include such persons as the accused in the trial if from the
evidence adduced, their complicity was also established. The further
effect as noted by the three-Judge Bench was that in less serious
offences triable by the Magistrate, he would have the power to proceed
against those mentioned in Column 2, in case he disagreed with the
police report, but in regard to serious offences triable by the Court of
Session, the Court would have to wait till the stage of Section 319 of
the Code was reached.
5. The three-Judge Bench disagreed with the views expressed in
Ranjit Singh case8, but since the contrary view expressed in Ranjit
Singh case8 had been taken by a three-Judge Bench, the three-
Judge Bench hearing this matter, by its order dated 1-12-20046,
directed the matter to be placed before the Chief Justice for placing
the same before a larger Bench-."
16. The questions which were formulated for answer by the
"7.1. Does the Committing Magistrate have any other role to play
after committing the case to the Court of Session on finding from the
police report that the case was triable by the Court of Session?
7.2. If the Magistrate disagrees with the police report and is
convinced that a case had also been made out for trial against the
persons who had been placed in Column 2 of the report, does he
have the jurisdiction to issue summons against them also in order to
include their names, along
with Nafe Singh, to stand trial in connection with the case made out in
the police report?
7.3. Having decided to issue summons against the appellants,
was the Magistrate required to follow the procedure of a complaint
case and to take evidence before committing them to the Court of
Session to stand trial or whether he was justified in issuing
summons against them without following such procedure?
7.4. Can the Sessions Judge issue summons under Section 193
CrPC as a court of original jurisdiction?
7.5. Upon the case being committed to the Court of Session, could
the Sessions Judge issue summons separately under Section 193 of
the Code or would he have to wait till the stage under Section 319 of
the Code was reached in order to take recourse thereto?
7.6. Was Ranjit Singh case8, which set aside the decision in
Kishun Singh case ¹, rightly decided or not?"
17. As regards scope of jurisdiction of the Magistrate in a situation of
this nature, it was held by the Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal³ :
"35. In our view, the Magistrate has a role to play while
committing the case to the Court of Session upon taking cognizance
on the police report submitted before him under Section 173(2)
CrPC. In the event the Magistrate disagrees with the police report,
he has two choices. He may act on the basis of a protest petition
that may be filed, or he may, while disagreeing with the police
report, issue process and summon the accused. Thereafter, if on
being satisfied that a case had been made out to proceed against the
persons named in Column 2 of the report, proceed to try the said
persons or if he was satisfied that a case had been made out which
was triable by the Court of Session, he may commit the case to the
Court of Session to proceed further in the matter.
36. This brings us to the third question as to the procedure to be
followed by the Magistrate if he was satisfied that a prima facie case
had been made out to go to trial despite the final report submitted
by the police. In such an event, if the Magistrate decided to proceed
against the persons accused, he would have to proceed on the basis
of the police report itself and either inquire into the matter or
commit it to the Court of Session if the same was found to be triable
by the Sessions Court."
18. Another Constitution Bench in Hardeep Singh V. State of Punjab
followed Dharam Pal³ It was opined by the Constitution Bench in
"111. Even the Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal³ has held that
the Sessions Court can also exercise its original jurisdiction and
summon a person as an accused in case his name appears in Column
2 of the charge-sheet, once the case had been committed to it. It
means that a person whose name does not appear even in the FIR or
in the charge-sheet or whose name appears in the FIR and not in the
main part of the charge-sheet but in Column 2 and has not been
summoned as an accused in exercise of the powers under Section
193 CrPC can still be summoned by the court, provided the court is
satisfied that the conditions provided in the said statutory provisions
stand fulfilled."
(emphasis supplied)
19. Earlier, a Coordinate Bench in Raj Kishore Prasad V. State of
Bihar10 expressed the view that power under Section 209 of the Code to
summon a new offender was not vested with a Magistrate. In this
decision, the correctness of the view taken in Kishun Singh V. State of
Bihar1 and Nisar V. State of U.P.¹ was doubted. The latter decision
followed Kishun Singh The Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal³
affirmed the view taken by this Court in Kishun Singh 7 and overruled
Raj Kishore Prasad10. In fact, again a Coordinate Bench in Balveer
Singh V. State of Rajasthan12 has followed both Dharam Pal³ and
Kishun In the latter authority (i.e. Kishun Singh ², it was, inter
"13. The question then is whether de hors Section 319 of the
Code, can similar power be traced to any other provision in the Code
or can such power be implied from the scheme of the Code? We have
already pointed out earlier the two alternative modes in which the
criminal law can be set in motion; by the filing of information with
the police under Section 154 of the Code or upon receipt of a
complaint or information by a Magistrate. The former would lead to
investigation by the police and may culminate in a police report
under Section 173 of the Code on the basis whereof cognizance may
be taken by the Magistrate under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code. In
the latter case, the Magistrate may either order investigation by the
police under Section 156(3) of the Code or himself hold an inquiry
under Section 202 before taking cognizance of the offence under
Section 190(1)(a) or (c), as the case may be, read with Section 204
of the Code.
Once the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence he may proceed to
try the offender (except where the case is transferred under Section
191) or commit him for trial under Section 209 of the Code if the
offence is triable exclusively by a Court of Session. As pointed out
earlier cognizance is taken of the offence and not the offender. This
Court in Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar13 stated that once
cognizance of an offence is taken it becomes the Court's duty 'to find
out who the offenders really are' and if the Court finds 'that apart from
the persons sent up by the police some other persons are involved, it is
its duty to proceed against those persons' by summoning them because
'the summoning of the additional accused is part of the proceeding
initiated by its taking cognizance of an offence'. Even after the present
Code came into force, the legal position has not undergone a change;
on the contrary the ratio of Dubey case13 was affirmed in Hareram
Satpathy V. Tikaram Agarwala¹4. Thus far there is no difficulty."
20. There is a difference so far as the position of law on which the
opinions of the two Constitution Benches were delivered in relation to
the facts of the present case. In Dharam Pal³ and Hardeep Singh2,
summons were issued against the persons whose names had figured in
Column (2) of the charge-sheet. Both these authorities also dealt with
exercise of jurisdiction of the Court of Session under Section 193 of the
Code. This provision reads:
"193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session.- - Except
as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or by any other law for
the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of
any offence as a Court of original jurisdiction unless the case has
been committed to it by a Magistrate under this Code."
21. It would appear from the Code that the jurisdiction to take
cognizance has been vested in the Magistrate (under Section 190
thereof) as also Court of Session under Section 193, which we have
quoted above. This question has been examined in Dharam Pal³ and on
"39. This takes us to the next question as to whether under
Section 209, the Magistrate was required to take cognizance of the
offence before committing the case to the Court of Session. It is well
settled that cognizance of an offence can only be taken once. In the
event, a Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then
commits the case to the Court of Session, the question of taking
fresh cognizance of the offence and, thereafter, proceed to issue
summons, is not in accordance with law. If
cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it could be taken either by the
Magistrate or by the Court of Session. The language of Section 193 of
the Code very clearly indicates that once the case is committed to the
Court of Session by the learned Magistrate, the Court of Session
assumes original jurisdiction and all that goes with the assumption of
such jurisdiction. The provisions of Section 209 will, therefore, have to
be understood as the learned Magistrate playing a passive role in
committing the case to the Court of Session on finding from the police
report that the case was triable by the Court of Session. Nor can there
be any question of part cognizance being taken by the Magistrate and
part cognizance being taken by the learned Sessions Judge."
(emphasis supplied)
22. The scope of jurisdiction of the Magistrate in taking cognizance
of an offence was earlier examined by a three-Judge Bench of this Court
in Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar13 This authority was relied upon
by the Coordinate Bench in Kishun Singh case Dealing with broadly
similar provisions of the old Code of 1898, it was observed by this
Court : (AIR pp. 1169-70, para 9)
"9.
In our opinion, once cognizance has been taken by the
Magistrate, he takes cognizance of an offence and not the offenders;
once he takes cognizance of an offence it is his duty to find out who
the offenders really are and once he comes to the conclusion that
apart from the persons sent up by the police some other persons are
involved, it is his duty to proceed against those persons. The
summoning of the additional accused is part of the proceeding
initiated by his taking cognizance of an offence. As pointed out by
this Court in Pravin Chandra Mody V. State of A.P. the term
15
"complaint" would include allegations made against persons
unknown. If a Magistrate takes cognizance under Section 190(1)(a)
on the basis of a complaint of facts he would take cognizance and a
proceeding would be instituted even though persons who had
committed the offence were not known at that time. The same
position prevails, in our view, under Section 190(1)(b)."
23. In Kishun Singh case ¹, the scope of jurisdiction of the Court of
Session under Section 193 of the Code was explained, relying on an
authority dealing with similar provision under the 1898 Code (P.C.
Gulati V. Lajya Ram 16. The phrase used to explain the implication of
taking cognizance by a Court of Session in the judgment of Kishun
Singh7 was "cognizance in the limited sense".
24. In para 8 of the Report (in Kishun Singh case ²), it has been held
"8. Section 193 of the old Code placed an embargo on the Court
of Session from taking cognizance of any offence as a court of
original jurisdiction unless the accused was committed to it by a
Magistrate or there was express provision in the Code or any other
law to the contrary. In the context of the said provision this Court in
P.C. Gulati V. Lajya Ram16 SCR p. 568, AIR p. 599, Cri LJ p. 469
observed as under : (AIR p. 599, para 21)
`21. When a case is committed to the Court of Session, the Court
of Session has first to determine whether the commitment of the
case is proper. If it be of opinion that the commitment is bad on a
point of law, it has to refer the case to the High Court which is
competent to quash the proceeding under Section 215 of the Code.
It is only when the Sessions Court considers the commitment to be
good in law that it proceeds with the trial of the case. It is in this
context that the Sessions Court has to take cognizance of the offence
as a court of original jurisdiction and it is such a cognizance which is
referred to in Section 193 of the Code.'
25. Jurisdiction of the Magistrate to take cognizance of an offence
triable by a Court of Session is not in controversy before us. The course
open to a Magistrate on submission of a police report has been
discussed in Dharam Pal³. In para 39 of the Report in Dharam Pal
case3 such power or jurisdiction of the Magistrate has been spelt out.
We have quoted this passage earlier in this judgment.
26. The other difference so far as this case is concerned in relation to
the factual basis on which the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Dharam Pal³ as also the judgment in Raghubans Dubey 13 were
delivered is that in both these cases, the names of the persons
arraigned as accused had figured in Column (2) of the charge-sheet.
This Column, as it appears from the judgment in Raghubans Dubey13,
records the name of a person under the heading "not sent up". In that
case, the person concerned was named in the FIR. But that factor, by
itself, in our opinion ought not to be considered as a reason for the
Court in not summoning an accused not named in the FIR and whose
name also does not feature in charge-sheet at all. These judgments
were delivered in cases where the names of the persons sought to be
arraigned as accused appeared in Column (2) of the police report. In
our opinion, the legal proposition laid down while dealing with this
point was not confined to the power to summon those persons only,
whose names featured in Column (2) of the charge-sheet.
27. In Dharam Pal³, the second point formulated (para 7.2) related
to persons named in Column (2), but the issue before the Constitution
Bench related to that category of persons only. This is the position of
law enunciated in Hardeep Singh and Raghubans Dubey13 13 In the
latter authority, the duty of the Court taking cognizance of an offence
has been held "to find out who the offenders really are and once he
comes to the conclusion that apart from the persons sent up by the
police some other persons are involved, it is his duty to proceed against
those persons". Such duty to proceed against other persons cannot be
held to be confined to only those whose names figure in Column (2) of
the charge-sheet.
28. As we have already observed that in the aforesaid authorities,
the question of summoning the persons named in Column (2) of the
charge-sheet was involved, in our opinion inclusion in Column (2) was
not held to be the determinant factor for summoning persons other
than those named as accused in the police report or charge-sheet. The
principle of law enunciated in Raghubans Dubey13, Dharam Pal³ and
Hardeep Singh9 does not constrict exercise of such power of the Court
taking cognizance in respect of this category of persons [i.e. whose
names feature in Column (2) of the charge-sheet].
29. In Raghubans Dubey13, SWIL Ltd. 2 and Dharam Pal³, the power
or jurisdiction of the court or Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence
on the basis of a police report to summon an accused not named in the
police report, before commitment has been analysed. The uniform view
on this point, irrespective of the fact as to whether cognizance is taken
by the Magistrate under Section 190 of the Code or jurisdiction
exercised by the Court of Session under Section 193 thereof is that the
aforesaid judicial authorities would not have to wait till the case reaches
the stage when jurisdiction under Section 319 of the Code is capable of
being exercised for summoning a person as accused but not named as
such in police report. We have already expressed our opinion that such
jurisdiction to issue summons can be exercised even in respect of a
person whose name may not feature at all in the police report, whether
as accused or in Column (2) thereof if the Magistrate is satisfied that
there are materials on record which would reveal prima facie his
involvement in the offence. None of the authorities limit or restrict the
power or jurisdiction of the Magistrate or Court of Session in
summoning an accused upon taking cognizance, whose name may not
feature in the FIR or police report.
30. In the present case, the name of the accused had transpired
from the statement made by the victim under Section 164 of the Code.
In Dharam Pal³, it has been laid down in clear terms that in the event
the Magistrate disagrees with the police report, he may act on the basis
of a protest petition that may be filed and commit the case to the Court
of Session. This power of the Magistrate
is not exercisable only in respect of persons whose names appear in
Column (2) of the charge-sheet, apart from those who are arraigned as
accused in the police report. In the subject proceeding, the Magistrate
acted on the basis of an independent application filed by the de facto
complainant. If there are materials before the Magistrate showing
complicity of persons other than those arraigned as accused or named
in Column (2) of the police report in commission of an offence, the
Magistrate at that stage could summon such persons as well upon
taking cognizance of the offence. As we have already discussed, this
was the view of this Court in Raghubans Dubey13. Though this
judgment dealt with the provisions of the 1898 Code, this authority was
followed in Kishun Singh7. For summoning persons upon taking
cognizance of an offence, the Magistrate has to examine the materials
available before him for coming to the conclusion that apart from those
sent up by the police some other persons are involved in the offence.
These materials need not remain confined to the police report, charge-
sheet or the FIR. A statement made under Section 164 of the Code
could also be considered for such purpose.
31. Turning to the facts of the present case, we do not find any error
in the order of the Magistrate, which was affirmed1 by the High Court.
We accordingly affirm the judgment under appeal. The appeal is
dismissed and the interim order17 passed in this matter shall stand
dissolved. Pending application( (s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
+
Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 8447 of 2015. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Criminal Misc. WP No. 11538 of 2015, dt. 14-5-2015) [Affirmed]
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
*
Ed. : There are two practice directions that were issued on 20-1-2005 and 29-8-2008:
learned counsel for the parties are requested to file a brief synopsis of submissions stating :
(a) brief relevant facts; (b) points arising for decision; (c) pleas sought to be urged; and (d)
list of authorities relied on (in support of each of the pleas). (Reference to specific
paragraphs be mentioned.) Such synopsis shall be filed within four weeks. At the end of the
hearing the Court may permit filing of detailed note of submissions, if necessary. List for
hearing thereafter."
And
learned counsel for the petitioners and respondents shall submit brief argument notes, the
number of documents and list of cases proposed to be cited in support of their arguments
and also indicate how much time is required for arguments on or before 1-10-2008. List these
matters on 4-11-2008 before the Constitution Bench."
10
12
13 Raghubans Dubey V. State of Bihar, (1967) 2 SCR 423 : AIR 1967 SC 1167
15 Pravin Chandra Mody V. State of A.P., (1965) 1 SCR 269 : AIR 1965 SC 1185 : (1965) 2 Cri
LJ 250
16
P.C. Gulati V. Lajya Ram, AIR 1966 SC 595 : 1966 Cri LJ 465 : (1966) 1 SCR 560
17