In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE B.R. GAVAI AND P.S. NARASIMHA, JJ.)
PHARMACY COUNCIL OF INDIA
Appellant;
Versus
RAJEEV COLLEGE OF PHARMACY AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeals No. 6681 of 2022 with Nos. 6682-83 of 2022 6684-
85 of 2022++ 6686 of 2022+ 6687 of 2022**, 6688 of 2022
6689 of 2022 , 6690 of 2022++ , 6691 of 2022 +#+ and Writ
Petitions Nos. 406, 563-65 of 2022+**, decided on September 15,
2022
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 19(1)(g), 19(6), 26 and 30 -
Establishment of educational institutions - Regulatory measures that may
be imposed - Interplay of Art. 19(1)(g), Art. 19(6), Art. 26 and Art. 30 in
this regard - Principles summarised
- With regard to establishment of educational institutions, three Articles of
Constitution come into play - Art. 19(1)(g) gives right to all citizens to practise
any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business; this right is subject
to restrictions that may be placed under Art. 19(6) - Art. 26 gives right to every
religious denomination to establish and maintain an institution for religious purposes,
which would include an educational institution - Art. 19(1)(g) and Art. 26,
therefore, confer rights on all citizens and religious denominations to establish and
maintain educational institutions - However, State would be entitled to impose
restrictions and make regulations both in terms of Art. 19(1)(g) and Art. 30 for
maintaining excellence in standard of education - Regulatory measures are
necessary for ensuring orderly, efficient and sound administration
- Right to impart education is a fundamental right under Art. 19(1)(g) and,
therefore, subject to control by cl. (6) of Art. 19 - Such a right is subject to laws
imposing reasonable restrictions in interest of general public - Laws may be
enacted for prescribing professional or technical qualifications necessary for
practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business
- Laws can also be enacted for purposes of carrying on by State, or by a
corporation owned or controlled by State of any trade, business, industry or service
whether to exclusion, complete or partial of citizens or otherwise
- Though private unaided minority and non-minority institutions have a right to
establish educational institutions, in order to balance public interest, State is also
empowered to frame Regulations in interest of general public - While considering
scope of reasonable restrictions which are sought to be brought in, in interest of
general public, exercise that is required to be undertaken is balancing of
fundamental rights to carry on a trade or occupation on one hand and restrictions
so imposed on other hand - It is necessary to find out as to whether restrictions
so imposed are proportional or not
B. Administrative Law - Administrative and Regulatory Bodies -
Administrative/Statutory Authorities - Powers and Jurisdiction - Ambit of
powers - A statutory body can do only such acts as are authorised by
statute creating it - Powers of such body cannot extend beyond what the
statute provides expressly or by necessary implication
- Statute Law - Statutory Bodies/Bodies regulated by statute - Ultra Vires -
Grounds for Plea of Ultra Vires - Acting Beyond the Statutory Powers - Education
Law - Professional Colleges/Education - Governing body/Governing Laws/Norms
- Pharmacy Act, 1948, Ss. 3, 10, 12 and 18
C. Education Law - Pharmacy Colleges/Institutions - Communications
issued in nature of executive instructions by Pharmacy Council of India
(PCI) imposing moratorium on opening of new Pharmacy colleges for
running diploma as well as degree course in Pharmacy for a period of five
years - Validity
- Right to establish institutions is fundamental right under Art. 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution and reasonable restrictions on such right, held, can be
imposed only by law and not by executive instructions - Communications in
question imposing restrictions on fundamental right to establish educational
institutions under Art. 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, being merely executive
instructions, hence, struck down
- Moratorium was issued by Central Council of appellant PCI in its executive
powers and not by framing any regulation, as provided under Ss. 10 and 18 of the
Act - PCI as statutory authority can do only such acts as are authorised by statute
creating it and powers of such corporation cannot extend beyond what statute
provides expressly or by necessary implication - Right to establish institutions is a
fundamental right under Art. 19(1)(g) and reasonable restrictions on such right can
be imposed only by law and not by executive instructions
- There could indeed be a necessity to impose certain restrictions so as to
prevent mushrooming growth of Pharmacy colleges - Such restrictions may be in
larger general public interest - If that has to be done, it has to be done strictly in
accordance with law - If and when such restrictions are imposed by an authority
competent to do so, validity of same can always be scrutinised on touchstone of
law
- Further applications seeking approval for D.Pharm and B.Pharm courses are
required to be accompanied by a "no-objection certificate" (NOC) from State
Government and consent of affiliation from affiliating bodies - While scrutinising
such applications, Council can always take into consideration various factors before
deciding to allow or reject such applications - Merely because an institution has a
right to establish an educational institution does not mean that such an application
has to be allowed - In a particular area, if there are more than sufficient number of
institutions already existing, Central Council can always take into consideration as
to whether it is necessary or not to increase number of institutions in such an area
- However, a blanket prohibition on establishment of Pharmacy colleges cannot be
imposed by an executive resolution
- Constitution of India - Arts. 19(1)(g) & (6) - Reasonable restrictions on
fundamental rights, reiterated, can be imposed only by law and not vide executive
instructions - Medical and Health Law - Pharmacy Act, 1948, Ss. 3, 10, 12 and
18
Vide Resolution/Communication dated 17-7-2019, the appellant PCI had
resolved to put a moratorium on the opening of new Pharmacy colleges for running
diploma as well as degree courses in Pharmacy for a period of five years beginning
from the Academic Year 2020-2021. Vide Resolution/communication dated 9-9-
2019, the aforesaid moratorium was modified, thereby exempting its application
to : (i) government institutions; (ii) institutions in North-Eastern region; and (iii)
States/Union Territories where the number of institutions offering D.Pharm and
B.Pharm courses (both combined) is less than 50.
The writ petitions filed by the institutions before the three High Courts challenged
the validity of the said moratorium and also prayed for a direction to be issued to
the appellant PCI to grant approval for opening new Pharmacy institutions imparting
Pharmacy courses for the ensuing Academic Year of 2022-2023.
By the judgments and orders dated 9-11-2021, the three High Courts of
Karnataka, Delhi and Chhattisgarh allowed the writ petitions filed by the respondent
institutions, which were, in turn, filed challenging the Resolutions/communications of
the appellant PCI dated 17-7-2019 and 9-9-2019 and dismissed the writ appeals
filed by PCI.
Thus the present appeals in the Supreme Court.
The appellant contended that the power to regulate would also include a power
to prohibit. The appellant contended that the moratorium could also be imposed by
a resolution of the appellant PCI and it would be a law as per Article 13 of the
Constitution.
The respondent contended that unless there is an approval of the Central
Government with regard to the moratorium, the same would not be valid in law.
The issue for determination before the Supreme Court was : Whether the
moratorium, as imposed by the Central Council of the appellant PCI, could have
been imposed by the said Resolution, which is in the nature of an executive
instruction of the Central Council?
Answering in the negative, the Supreme Court
Held :
Moratorium in present case was issued by the Central Council of the appellant
PCI in its executive powers and not by framing any regulation, as provided under
Sections 10 and 18 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948.
(Para 32)
With regard to the establishment of educational institutions, three articles of the
Constitution come into play. Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution gives the right to
all the citizens to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business; this right is subject to restrictions that may be placed under Article 19(6)
of the Constitution. Article 26 of the Constitution the right to every religious
denomination to establish and maintain an institution for religious purposes, which
would include an educational institution. Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26 of the
Constitution, therefore, confer rights on all citizens and religious denominations to
establish and maintain educational institutions.
(Para 34)
followed
The State would be entitled to impose restrictions and make regulations both in
terms of Article 19(1)(g) and Article 30 of the Constitution for maintaining
excellence in the standard of education. Regulatory measures are necessary for
ensuring orderly, efficient and sound administration.
(Para 37)
339, followed
Right to impart education is a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution and, therefore, subject to control by clause (6) of Article 19 of the
Constitution. Such a right is subject to the laws imposing reasonable restrictions in
the interest of the general public. Laws may be enacted for prescribing the
professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or
carrying on any occupation, trade or business. The laws could also be enacted for
the purposes of the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or
controlled by the State of any trade, business, industry or service whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial of citizens or otherwise.
(Para 39)
Though private unaided minority and non-minority institutions have a right to
establish educational institutions, in order to balance the public interest, the State is
also empowered to frame Regulations in the interest of general public. While
considering the scope of reasonable restrictions which are sought to be brought in,
in the interest of the general public, the exercise that is required to be undertaken is
the balancing of the fundamental rights to carry on a trade or occupation on one
hand and the restrictions so imposed on the other hand. It is necessary to find out
as to whether the restrictions so imposed are proportional or not.
(Para 40)
SCEC 1, followed
It is thus clear that though there is a fundamental right to establish educational
institutions, the same can be subject to reasonable restrictions, which are found
necessary in the general public interest. However, the question that requires to be
answered is as to whether the same can be done by executive instructions or not.
(Para 41)
Establishment and management of an educational institution has been held to be
a part of fundamental right being a right of occupation as envisaged under Article 19
(1)(g) of the Constitution. A citizen cannot be deprived of the said right except in
accordance with law. The requirement of law for the purpose of clause (6) of Article
19 of the Constitution can by no stretch of imagination be achieved by issuing a
circular or a policy decision in terms of Article 162 of the Constitution or otherwise.
Such a law, it is trite, must be one enacted by the legislature.
(Para 42)
State or its officers cannot exercise its executive authority to infringe the rights
of the citizens merely because the legislature of the State has the power to legislate
in regard to the subject on which the executive order is issued.
(Paras 44 to 50)
State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh, (1967) 2 SCR 454 : AIR 1967 SC 1170, followed
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University V. Sangam Laxmi Bai Vidyapeet, (2019)
A statutory corporation can do only such acts as are authorised by the statute
creating it and that the powers of such a corporation cannot extend beyond what
the statute provides expressly or by necessary implication.
(Paras 52 to 54)
OnLine Kar 15764; Pharmacy Council of India V. Sidramappa Danigond Memorial
distinguished on fact
Sayali Charitable Trust's College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India, 2020
Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn. at pp. 775 & 779, referred to
Thus, it is held that the Resolutions/communications dated 17-7-2019 and 9-9-
2019 of the Central Council of the appellant PCI, which are in the nature of
executive instructions, could not impose restrictions on the fundamental right to
establish educational institutions under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
(Para 55)
There could indeed be a necessity to impose certain restrictions so as to prevent
mushrooming growth of Pharmacy colleges. Such restrictions may be in the larger
general public interest. However, if that has to be done, it has to be done strictly
in accordance with law. If and when such restrictions are imposed by an authority
competent to do so, the validity of the same can always be scrutinised on the
touchstone of law.
(Para 56)
It is further to be noted that the applications seeking approval for D.Pharm and
B.Pharm courses are required to be accompanied by a "no-objection
certificate" (NOC) from the State Government and consent of affiliation from the
affiliating bodies. While scrutinising such applications, the Council can always take
into consideration various factors before deciding to allow or reject such
applications. Merely because an institution has a right to establish an educational
institution does not mean that such an application has to be allowed. In a particular
area, if there is more than sufficient number of institutions already existing, the
Central Council can always take into consideration as to whether it is necessary or
not to increase the number of institutions in such an area. However, a blanket
prohibition on the establishment of Pharmacy colleges cannot be imposed by an
executive resolution.
(Para 57)
OnLine Kar 1540: Gvan Ganga College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India.
OnLine Del 5646, impliedly reversed
1310, referred to
Madhya Bharat Cotton Assn. Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1954 SC 634; Modern
(L&S) 760; Index Medical College, Hospital & Research Centre V. State of M.P.,
RM-D/69619/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Maninder Singh, Rakesh Dwivedi, Vinay Navare and S.N. Bhat,
Senior Advocates [Amit Pai, Sanjay Sharawat (Advocate-on-Record),
Siddharth R. Gupta, Shivam Singh, Mrigank Prabhakar (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Sakshi Banga, Gaurav Sharma (Advocate-on-Record),
Zoheb Hossain (Advocate-on-Record), R.K. Ruhil, Anil Kumar,
Shashank Shekhar Singh, Rahul Verma, Ms Priyanka Singh (Advocate-
on-Record), Samrat Krishnarao Shinde (Advocate-on-Record), Pai Amit
(Advocate-on-Record), Ashwin Kr. D.S., Rajesh Inamdar, Omkar Kambi,
Ms Pankhuri Bhardwaj, Suraj Naik, Abhiyudaya Vats, Rohit R. Saboo,
Saurabh Agrawal, Ms Komal Mundhra, Revant Solanki, Harsh Pandey,
Shubhranshu Padhi (Advocate-on-Record), Vishal Banshal, Ms
Rajeshwari Shankar, Niroop Sukrithy, Mohd. Ovais, V.N. Raghupathy
(Advocate-on-Record), Md. Apzal Ansari, Gautam Narayan (Advocate-
on-Record), D.P. Chaturvedi, Tarun Kr. Thakur, Ms Parvati Bhat, Ms
Anuradha Mutatkar (Advocate-on-Record), Ravikant, Mayank Manish,
Chandarshekhar Singh, Vivek Singh, C.P. Rajwar, Pushkar Anand,
Chandra Prakash (Advocate-on-Record), Amitesh Kumar, Ms Binisa
Mohanty, Arya Tripathy, Ms Priti Kumari, Mritunjay Kr. Sinha (Advocate-
on-Record), Kunal Chatterji (Advocate-on-Record), Kaushal Yadav
(Advocate-on-Record), Nandlal Kr. Mishra, Shafik Ahmed, Ms Yashoda
Katiyar, Gourave Kr. Agarwal (Advocate-on-Record), Sanjay Rathi,
Ekansh Bansal, Vibhav Mishra, Deepak Khatri, Parmanand Gaur
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Beena S. Patnaik, Hitesh Kr. Sharma, S.K.
Rajora, Akhileshwar Jha and A.K. Sharma (Advocate-on-Record),
Advocates], for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Index Medical College, Hospital & Research
Centre V. State of M.P.
514a-b
of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
509b-c
India V. Ravi Patil College of Pharmacy
509b-c
Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
510a
Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
509b-c, 509c
College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
509b, 509c
511e, 519d, 519d-e
India V. Sidramappa Danigond Memorial Trust
509a-b, 509c
India V. Shifa College of Pharmacy
509a-b, 509c
of India V. Rajeev College of Pharmacy
509a-b, 509c
of India V. Rajeev College of Pharmacy
509b-c
College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
(impliedly reversed)
509b-c, 522e
of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India
509b-c
Trust's College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council
of India (overruled)
511b, 521d
Technological University V. Sangam Laxmi B11c-d, 511d, 518e-f, 518f
Vidyapeet
-g
Industrial Policy & Promotion
511a-b, 521b, 521c-d
College & Research Centre V. State of M.P.
514b, 517f
Vijay S. Sathaye V. Indian Airlines Ltd.
513d
Padubidri Damodar Shenoy V. Indian Airlines Ltd.
513d
SCEC 589, State of Bihar V. Project Uchcha
Vidya, Sikshak Sangh
518a-b, 518d
State of Maharashtra
511f, 517a, 517d
V. Union of India
513c
Academy of Education V. State of Karnataka
511f, 516d-e, 516g
Foundation V. State of Karnataka
511f, 516a-b, 518b-c
Khanzode V. RBI
513b, 519g, 520g
26. (1967) 2 SCR 454 : AIR 1967 SC 1170, State of
M.P. V. Bharat Singh
519a, 519b-c
27. AIR 1954 SC 634, Madhya Bharat Cotton Assn.
Ltd. V. Union of India
511a
Shahjahanpur
519f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.R. GAVAI, J.- Leave granted in all the special leave petitions. The
appeals filed by the Pharmacy Council of India (hereinafter referred to
as "PCI") mainly challenge the : (i) judgments dated 9-11-2021 1, 2,
3
,
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka at
Bengaluru in Writ Appeals Nos. 746-748 of 2020; (ii) judgment dated 7
-3-2022, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi
at New Delhi in Shaheed Teg Bhadur College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy
Council of India4; and (iii) judgment dated 22-4-2022, passed by the
learned Single Judge of the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in
Chouksey College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India5. 5 Several
interim orders 6, Z, 8,
9,
10 passed by these courts during the pendency of
these matters are also subject to challenge in some of the appeals.
They are also being disposed of by the present judgment.
2. By the said judgments and orders, the aforesaid three High Courts
of Karnataka 1, 2, 3, , Delhi4 and Chhattisgarh5 had allowed the writ
petitions filed by the respondent institutions, which were, in turn, filed
challenging the resolutions/communications of the appellant PCI dated
17-7-2019 and 9-9-2019 and dismissed the writ appeals filed by PCI.
Vide Resolution/Communication dated 17-7-2019, the appellant PCI
had resolved to put a moratorium on the opening of new Pharmacy
colleges for running diploma as well as degree courses in Pharmacy for
a period of five years beginning from the Academic Year 2020-2021.
Vide Resolution/communication dated 9-9-2019, the aforesaid
moratorium was modified, thereby exempting its application to : (i)
government institutions; (ii) institutions in North-Eastern region; and
(iii) States/Union Territories where the number of institutions offering
D.Pharm and B.Pharm courses (both combined) is less than 50.
Additionally, vide the said Resolution/communication dated 9-9-2019,
the institutions which had applied for opening colleges offering D.Pharm
and/or B.Pharm courses for 2019-2020 academic session were allowed
to apply for conducting diploma as well as degree courses in Academic
Session 2020-2021 and existing approved Pharmacy institutions were
allowed to increase the intake capacity as per PCI norms and/or to start
additional Pharmacy course(s).
3. The writ petitions filed by the Institutions before the three High
Courts challenged the validity of the said moratorium and also prayed
for a direction to be issued to the appellant PCI to grant approval for
opening new Pharmacy
institutions imparting Pharmacy courses for the ensuing Academic Year
of 2022-2023 on the basis of inspection conducted by PCI in February
2020 and to not insist on fresh applications from the institutions
pursuant to PCI's Circular of 3-7-2022, which was issued in compliance
of the interim order of this Court dated 31-5-2022 11 passed in Special
Leave Petition (Civil) No. 4862 of 2022.
4. We have heard Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant PCI and Shri Rakesh Dwivedi and
Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel, Shri Amit Pai, Shri Sanjay
Sharawat, Shri Siddharth R. Gupta, and Shri Shivam Singh, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of their respective respondent(s).
5. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel would submit that
the High Courts have totally erred in interfering with the Resolution
dated 17-7-2019 passed by the appellant PCI. He submits that the
perusal of the Preamble to the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred
to as "the said Act") read with Sections 3, 10 and 12 thereof would
clearly reveal that the appellant PCI has a power to regulate in the field
of Pharmacy education. He submits that the power to regulate would
also include a power to put a moratorium for a certain period.
6. The learned Senior Counsel submits that perusal of Section 3 of
the said Act would reveal that the Central Council of PCI consists of
experts from various fields including teachers in the subject concerning
Pharmacy, elected by the University Grants Commission ("UGC" for
short), persons possessing a degree or diploma in and practising
Pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry, nominated by the Central
Government; a representative of the Medical Council of India;
representatives of States elected from the Members of the State
Council, so also a member to represent each State nominated by the
State Government, who shall be a registered pharmacist. He, therefore,
submits that the body, which consists of so many experts from various
fields, is a body which is competent to take decisions in the best
interests of the Pharmacy education.
7. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel submits that the
decision was taken by the appellant PCI after a Sub-Committee of
experts was appointed to study the issue. It is submitted that after the
Sub-Committee recommended moratorium in view of mushrooming
growth of Pharmacy colleges, the Central Council of the appellant PCI,
after taking into consideration all these aspects, recommended a
moratorium. He submits that this was done in order to prevent a
situation which would lead to uncontrolled growth of Pharmacy colleges,
resultantly producing many pharmacists, who will be without any
employment. It is submitted that these factors have not been taken
into consideration by the High Courts in the impugned judgments.
8. Shri Maninder Singh further submitted that the perusal of the
Communication of the Government of India, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare dated 22-4-2022 would reveal that the Central
Government was consulted as required under Section 10 of the said
Act.
9. Shri Maninder Singh further submitted that the power to regulate
would also include a power to prohibit. He relies on the judgments of
this Court in Madhya Bharat Cotton Assn. Ltd. V. Union of India 12 and in
Star India (P) Ltd. V. Deptt. of Industrial Policy & Promotion13 13 in this
regard.
10. Shri Maninder Singh would further submit that a Division Bench
of the Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench, in a batch of writ
petitions being Writ Petition No. 4919 of 2020 (Sayali Charitable Trust's
College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India¹4 along with
connected matters has upheld the moratorium. He submits that,
however, the said judgment of the Bombay High Court has not been
considered by all the three High Courts of Karnataka, Delhi and
Chhattisgarh.
11. Shri Maninder Singh submits that, having regard to the scheme
of the said Act and the purpose sought to be achieved therein, it will
have to be held that it is not only the jurisdiction of PCI, but its duty
and responsibility to impose a moratorium so as to prevent
mushrooming growth of Pharmacy colleges in the country. The learned
Senior Counsel further submits that the power to impose such
regulations has been upheld by this Court in Jawaharlal Nehru
Technological University V. Sangam Laxmi Bai Vidyapeet15. He submits
that the facts in the present case and the facts in Jawaharlal Nehru
Technological University15 are totally identical. It is, therefore,
submitted that the view taken by all the three High Courts is liable to
be set aside and it is required to be held that the moratorium imposed,
being in the larger public interest, is legal and valid.
12. Shri Maninder Singh relies on the judgment of this Court in Jigya
Yadav V. CBSE16 in support of his submission that the moratorium
could also be imposed by a resolution of the appellant PCI and it would
be a law as per Article 13 of the Constitution of India.
13. Per contra, Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel,
submitted that it is the fundamental right of the respondent institutions
to establish educational institutions under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India. He relies on the judgments of this Court in T.M.A.
Pai Foundation V. State of Karnataka ¹7, Islamic Academy of Education
V.
State of Karnataka¹8, , and P.A. Inamdar V. State of Maharashtra¹9 in
that regard.
14. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi submits that there is no doubt that
reasonable restrictions could be imposed on the fundamental rights.
However, the burden lies on the State to establish that the restrictions
so imposed are reasonable and have a nexus with the object to be
achieved. He submits that the appellant PCI
has totally failed to discharge the said burden. It is submitted that the
restriction, which is in the nature of absolute prohibition, is totally
unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory. It is submitted that it has
no nexus with the object to be achieved.
15. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi further submits that the impugned
communications of the appellant PCI are arbitrary. To buttress his
submission that the impugned communications of the appellant PCI are
arbitrary, Shri Rakesh Dwivedi submitted that the appellant PCI itself
has exempted government colleges from the moratorium imposed,
which has in effect added about 34,000 seats in the field of Pharmacy.
He further submits that the impugned communication exempts the
North-Eastern Region from its operation. As such, the power has been
exercised in a manifestly arbitrary manner. It is submitted that the only
justification given is that if there is no moratorium, it will lead to
unemployment. He submits that if such a ground is to be accepted,
then all the colleges imparting education in different areas like
Medicine, Law, Engineering, Technology, etc. will have to be banned.
16. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi further submitted that, unless the power to
ban is specifically provided in the statute, such a power cannot be
exercised. In any case, he submitted that if such a power was to be
exercised, the same could have been exercised only by framing a
regulation in accordance with Section 10 of the said Act. He further
submitted that for such a regulation to be valid, the following four
factors are required to be complied with:
(i) The copies of the draft Regulations should be furnished by the
Central Council to all the State Governments and before the Central
Council submits the Education Regulations to the Central
Government for approval, the comments of the State Governments
are to be invited and considered;
(ii) That such Regulations must have approval of the Central
Government;
(iii) In view of Section 10(4), such Regulations will have to be
published in the Official Gazette;
(iv) In view of sub-section (4) of Section 18 of the said Act, such
Regulations have to be laid before each House of Parliament.
17. Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the
perusal of Section 3 of the said Act would reveal that the Central
Council of the appellant PCI consists essentially of persons who are
connected with the practice of Pharmacy. He submits that the
moratorium is imposed with a mala fide intention by those persons who
are already connected with the profession of Pharmacy so as to create a
monopoly in the field. He submits that if the composition of the Central
Council of the appellant PCI under the said Act is compared with the
composition of the Council under the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as "the AICTE Act"), it
would reveal that the Council under the AICTE Act has a wider
spectrum. It also consists of the persons not connected with technical
education.
18. Shri Navare further submitted that the powers under Section 10
of the AICTE Act are much wider than the powers of the Central Council
under Section 10 of the said Act.
19. Shri Navare further submitted that the Resolution which is sent
to the State Government is only for the purpose of intimation and,
therefore, there is no sufficient compliance of requirement under
Section 10(3) of the said Act.
20. Relying on the judgment of this Court in V.T. Khanzode V. RBI -Superscript(2)
Shri Navare submits that since the appellant PCI is a statutory body, its
powers would be circumscribed by the statutory provisions. He
submitted that since the power to impose prohibition is not provided
under the said Act, such an exercise is wholly impermissible in law.
21. He further submits that there can be no restrictions on
fundamental rights except by a valid law enacted by the legislature. In
this respect, he relies on the judgment of this Court in Modern School
V. Union of India²1
22. Shri Navare further submits that the words used in sub-section
(1) of Section 10 of the said Act are "subject to the approval of the
Central Government". He, therefore, submits that unless there is an
approval of the Central Government with regard to the moratorium, the
same would not be valid in law. He relies on the judgments of this
Court in Padubidri Damodar Shenoy V. Indian Airlines Ltd. 22 , and Vijay
S. Sathaye V. Indian Airlines Ltd. 23 in support of this proposition.
23. Shri Amit Pai, learned counsel also submitted that the impugned
communications are totally beyond the powers of the appellant PCI
and, as such, no interference is warranted with the impugned
judgments and orders of the High Courts.
24. Shri Sanjay Sharawat, learned counsel submitted that the
decision to impose moratorium has been taken by the appellant PCI
without conducting any survey. No material is placed on record in
support of its decision. He submits that the decision to impose
moratorium is wholly arbitrary. He further submits that the appellant
PCI has acted in an arbitrary manner. On one hand, it has imposed ban
and on the other hand it has granted permission to about 2500
institutions to start Pharmacy courses. As such, it has acted in a totally
arbitrary and discriminatory manner.
25. Shri Siddharth Gupta, learned counsel submitted that the
impugned communications are totally discriminatory in nature and tend
to create a monopoly in respect of the existing colleges inasmuch as
they have been permitted to expand the number of existing seats. He
further submits that the cap of 50 colleges imposed for all the States is
totally arbitrary. He submits that
the cap for a highly populated State like Uttar Pradesh and for a small
State like Goa is the same. He submits that in the State of
Chhattisgarh, 7 colleges have been granted permission on the ground
that they were in the pipeline. As such, there is no consistency in the
policy of the appellant PCI. He relies on the judgments of this Court in
Index Medical College, Hospital & Research Centre V. State of M.P. 24 in
support of his submission.
26. Relying on the judgment of this Court in Modern Dental College
& Research Centre V. State of M.P. 25 he submits that unless the
impugned restriction satisfies the test of proportionality of restrictions,
the same would not be tenable in law. He submits that it will be
necessary to find out as to whether the limitation on constitutional
rights is for a purpose which is reasonable and necessary in a
democratic society. He submits that applying the said test, the
impugned communication which imposed a total ban for a period of five
years does not stand the proportionality test.
27. Shri Shivam Singh, learned counsel submitted that the decision-
making process is totally vitiated. He submits that taking into
consideration the pandemic situation, the Authorities ought to have
considered that there is a need to have a larger number of Pharmacy
colleges. However, this aspect has been totally ignored by the appellant
PCI.
28. All the three High Courts i.e. Karnataka, Delhi and Chhattisgarh,
while allowing the writ petitions filed by the respondent institutions and
quashing and setting aside the Resolutions/communications of the
Central Council of the appellant PCI, have, in a nutshell, held thus:
28.1. That the right to establish educational institutions is a
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India.
28.2. That there can be reasonable restrictions on such a right.
However, such a restriction can be imposed only by law enacted by the
competent legislature.
28.3. The Resolution/communication dated 17-7-2019, vide which
the moratorium was imposed is an executive instruction and could not
be construed as a law and, therefore, the moratorium imposed by an
executive instruction is not sustainable in law.
29. Apart from that, the learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High
Court has further found that the petitioners before the High Court were
entitled to establish colleges on the principles of promissory estoppel
and legitimate expectation. The learned Single Judge of the Karnataka
High Court as well as the learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court
have also held that the Resolution of the appellant PCI was violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as the government
institutions and the institutions in the North-Eastern region were
exempted from the applicability of the moratorium. It was found that
such an act was discriminatory. It was further found that the cap of 50
Pharma institutes per State was also arbitrary inasmuch as the
appellant PCI does not take into consideration the fact that the
population of the States varies from State to State and, as such, there
could not have been a uniform formula of capping 50 Pharmacy
institutes for every State.
30. Undisputedly, the Central Council of the appellant PCI vide its
Resolution/communication dated 17-7-2019 has resolved as under:
"RESOLUTION
Taking into consideration the availability of sufficient qualified
pharmacist workforce, the House unanimously resolved to put a
moratorium on the opening of new Pharmacy colleges for running
diploma as well as degree course in Pharmacy for a period of five
years beginning from the Academic Year 2020-2021. This
moratorium shall not be applicable in the North-Eastern Region of
the country where there is a shortage of Pharmacy colleges."
31. It can thus be seen that vide the said Resolution, the Central
Council resolved to put a moratorium on the opening of new Pharmacy
colleges for running diploma as well as degree course in Pharmacy for a
period of five years beginning from the Academic Year 2020-2021. The
said Resolution dated 17-7-2019 was modified in the 107th meeting of
the Central Council of the appellant PCI held on 5-8-2019 and 6-8-
2019. The relevant part of the modified resolution reads thus:
"1252.4. In view of it, it was unanimously decided that
moratorium on the opening of new Pharmacy colleges for running
diploma as well as degree course in Pharmacy for a period of five
years beginning from the Academic Year 2020-2021 will be subject
to following conditions-
(a) The moratorium will not apply to the government institutions.
(b) The moratorium will not apply to the institutions in North-
Eastern Region.
(c) The moratorium will not apply to the States/Union Territories
where the number of D.Pharm and B. Pharm institutions (both
combined) is less than 50.
(d) The institutions which had applied for opening Pharm and/or
Pharm colleges for 2019-2020 academic session either to PCI or to
the AICTE and the proposal was rejected or not inspected due to
some reason or the other will be allowed to apply for 2020-2021
academic session and this relaxation is given only for one year i.e.
for 2020-2021 academic session only.
(e) Existing approved Pharmacy institutions will be allowed to
apply for increase in intake capacity as per PCI norms and/or to start
additional Pharmacy course(s)."
32. It is thus clear, and in all fairness, not even disputed by the
appellant PCI, that the moratorium was issued by the Central Council of
the appellant PCI in its executive powers and not by framing any
regulation, as provided under Sections 10 and 18 of the said Act.
33. The moot question, therefore, that requires consideration, is as
to whether the moratorium, as imposed by the Central Council of the
appellant PCI, could have been imposed by the said Resolution, which
is in the nature of an executive instruction of the Central Council.
34. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of the
Constitution Bench, consisting of 11 Judges, of this Court in T.M.A. Pai
"18. With regard to the establishment of educational institutions,
three articles of the Constitution come into play. Article 19(1)(g)
gives the right to all the citizens to practise any profession or to
carry on any occupation, trade or business; this right is subject to
restrictions that may be placed under Article 19(6). Article 26 gives
the right to every religious denomination to establish and maintain
an institution for religious purposes, which would include an
educational institution. Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26, therefore,
confer rights on all citizens and religious denominations to establish
and maintain educational institutions."
35. It could thus clearly be seen that the Constitution Bench of this
Court in the aforesaid case, in unequivocal terms, holds that in view of
Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26 of the Constitution of India, all citizens
and religious denominations are conferred with a right to establish and
maintain educational institutions.
36. Another Constitution Bench, consisting of five Judges, of this
65, paras 120-21)
"120. So far as institutions imparting professional education are
concerned, having regard to the public interest, they are bound to
maintain excellence in the standard of education. To that extent,
there cannot be any compromise and the State would be entitled to
impose restrictions and make regulations both in terms of Article 19
(1)(g) and Article 30 of the Constitution of India. The width of the
rights and limitations thereof of unaided institutions whether run by
a majority or a minority must conform to the maintenance of
excellence. With a view to achieve the said goal, indisputably, the
regulations can be made by the State.
121. The right to administer does not amount to the right to
maladminister and the right is not free from regulation. The
regulatory measures are necessary for ensuring orderly, efficient and
sound administration. The regulatory measures can be laid down by
the State in the administration of minority institutions."
37. It could thus be seen that the Constitution Bench in Islamic
Academy of Education18 holds that the State would be entitled to
impose restrictions and make regulations both in terms of Article 19(1)
(g) and Article 30 of the Constitution of India for maintaining
excellence in the standard of education. It has been held that
regulatory measures are necessary for ensuring orderly, efficient and
sound administration.
38. Thereafter the Constitution Bench, consisting of seven Judges, of
"92. As an occupation, right to impart education is a fundamental
right under Article 19(1)(g) and, therefore, subject to control by
clause (6) of Article 19. This right is available to all citizens without
drawing a distinction between minority and non-minority. Such a
right is, generally speaking, subject to the laws imposing reasonable
restrictions in the interest of the general public. In particular, laws
may be enacted on the following subjects : (i) the professional or
technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or
carrying on any occupation, trade or business; (ii) the carrying on by
the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State of
any trade, business, industry or service whether to the exclusion,
complete or partial of citizens or otherwise. Care is taken of
minorities, religious or linguistic, by protecting their right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice
under Article 30. To some extent, what may be permissible by way
of restriction under Article 19(6) may fall foul of Article 30. This is
the additional protection which Article 30(1) grants to the
minorities."
39. It could thus be seen that the Constitution Bench of this Court in
P.A. Inamdar 19 has again reiterated that the right to impart education
is a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) and, therefore, subject to
control by clause (6) of Article 19. It has been held that such a right is
subject to the laws imposing reasonable restrictions in the interest of
the general public. It has further been held that the laws may be
enacted for prescribing the professional or technical qualifications
necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation,
trade or business. The laws could also be enacted for the purposes of
the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by
the State of any trade, business, industry or service whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial of citizens or otherwise.
40. In Modern Dental College & Research Centre25 , the Constitution
Bench, consisting of five Judges, of this Court held that though private
unaided minority and non-minority institutions have a right to establish
educational institutions, in order to balance the public interest, the
State is also empowered to frame Regulations in the interest of general
public. This Court held that, while considering the scope of reasonable
restrictions which are sought to be brought in, in the interest of the
general public, the exercise that is required to be undertaken is the
balancing of the fundamental rights to carry on a trade or occupation on
one hand and the restrictions so imposed on the other hand. This Court
held that it was necessary to find out as to whether the restrictions so
imposed were proportional or not.
The surest way't to legal research!"
41. It is thus clear that though there is a fundamental right to
establish educational institutions, the same can be subject to
reasonable restrictions, which are found necessary in the general public
interest. However, the question that requires to be answered is as to
whether the same can be done by executive instructions or not.
42. The question is directly answered by this Court in State of Bihar
V. Project Uchcha Vidya, Sikshak Sangh26 in para 69, which reads
"69. The right to manage an institution is also a right to property.
In view of a decision of an eleven-Judge Bench of this Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation V. State of Karnataka¹7 establishment and
management of an educational institution has been held to be a part
of fundamental right being a right of occupation as envisaged under
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. A citizen cannot be deprived of
the said right except in accordance with law. The requirement of law
for the purpose of clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution can by
no stretch of imagination be achieved by issuing a circular or a policy
decision in terms of Article 162 of the Constitution or otherwise.
Such a law, it is trite, must be one enacted by the legislature."
(emphasis supplied)
43. It could thus be seen that this Court in Project Uchcha Vidya
case 26 has categorically held that a citizen cannot be deprived of the
said right except in accordance with law. It has further been held that
the requirement of law for the purpose of clause (6) of Article 19 of the
Constitution can by no stretch of imagination be achieved by issuing a
circular or a policy decision in terms of Article 162 of the Constitution or
otherwise. It has been held that such a law must be one enacted by the
legislature.
44. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel, relied on the
judgment of this Court in Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University15
to submit that in the said case also, a moratorium which was imposed
by the State of Telangana was found to be valid since it was done to
control mushrooming growth of educational institutions.
45. A perusal of the judgment of this Court in Jawaharlal Nehru
Technological University15 would reveal that this Court found that
Section 20 of the Telangana Education Act, 1982 specifically
empowered the State to issue such a direction imposing a moratorium.
No such provision can be found in the said Act, which would empower
such a restriction to be imposed by the Resolution of the Central
Council.
46. It will also be relevant to refer to the following observation of the
Constitution Bench, consisting of five Judges, of this Court in State of
M.P. V. Bharat Singh27 : (AIR p. 1174, para 6)
"6.
Viewed in the light of these facts the observations relied
upon do not support the contention that the State or its officers may
in exercise of executive authority infringe the rights of the citizens
merely because the legislature of the State has the power to
legislate in regard to the subject on which the executive order is
issued."
47. It is thus clear that the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Bharat Singh case27 holds that the State or its officers cannot exercise
its executive authority to infringe the rights of the citizens merely
because the Legislature of the State has the power to legislate in regard
to the subject on which the executive order is issued.
48. It could thus be seen that the Constitution Bench holds that
even an executive cannot do something to infringe the rights of the
citizens by an executive action, though the State Legislature has
legislative competence to legislate on the subject.
49. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf
of the appellant PCI, relies on the judgment of this Court in Jigya Yadav
V. CBSE¹ in support of his contention that since the Central Council of
the appellant PCI is a public authority and discharges public functions,
the Resolution resolved by it would partake the character of a law
within the meaning of Article 13 of the Constitution of India. It may be
noted that in Jigya Yadav V. CBSE16, this Court was considering the
powers of the Central Board of Secondary Education ("CBSE" for short),
which is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
CBSE is not a body incorporated under any statutory provisions.
However, the Central Council of the appellant PCI is a statutory body
constituted under the said Act.
50. It will be relevant to refer to the observations of this Court in
160, para 15)
"15.
The defendants were a Board created by statute and were
invested with powers which of necessity had to be found within the
four corners of the statute itself.
51. It will also be relevant to refer to para 18 of the judgment of this
"18. In support of this submission, reliance is placed by the
learned counsel on the statement of law contained in paras 1326 and
1333 (pp. 775
and 779) of Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn. In Para 1326 it is
stated that:
'Corporations may be either statutory or non-statutory, and a
fundamental distinction exists between the powers and liabilities of
the two classes. Statutory corporations have such rights and can do
such acts only as are authorised directly or indirectly by the statutes
creating them; non-statutory corporations, speaking generally, can
do everything that an ordinary individual can do unless restricted
directly or indirectly by statute.'
Para 1333 says that:
'The powers of a corporation created by statute are limited and
circumscribed by the statutes which regulate it, and extend no
further than is expressly stated therein, or is necessarily and
properly required for carrying into effect the purposes of its
incorporation, or may be fairly regarded as incidental to, or
consequential upon, those things which the legislature has
authorised. What the statute does not expressly or impliedly
authorise is to be taken to be prohibited.'
There is no doubt that a statutory corporation can do only such acts as are
authorised by the statute creating it and that, the powers of such a corporation
cannot extend beyond what the statute provides expressly or by necessary
implication. If an act is neither expressly nor impliedly authorised by the statute
which creates the corporation, it must be taken to be prohibited. This cannot,
however, produce the result for which Shri Nariman contends. His contention is
not that the Central Board has no power to frame staff regulations but that it must
do so under Section 58(1) only. On that argument, it is material to note that
Section 58(1) is in the nature of an enabling provision under which the Central
Board "may" make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which it is
necessary or convenient to make provision for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of the Act. This provision does not justify the argument that staff
regulations must be framed under it or not at all. The substance of the matter is
that the Central Board has the power to frame regulations relating to the conditions
of service of the Bank's staff. If it has that power, it may exercise it either in
accordance with Section 58(1) or by acting appropriately in the exercise of its
general power of administration and superintendence."
(emphasis supplied)
52. It could thus be seen that this Court has in V.T. Khanzode case20
approved Paras 1326 and 1333 (pp. 775 and 779) of Halsbury's Laws of
England, 4th Edn., to the effect that a statutory corporation can do only
such acts as are authorised by the statute creating it and that the
powers of such a corporation cannot extend beyond what the statute
provides expressly or by necessary implication. Though in the said case,
this Court held that the said
principle is not applicable inasmuch as the Central Board has the power
to frame regulations relating to the conditions of service of the Bank's
staff, the said principle will indeed be applicable to the case at hand.
53. Shri Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel, further submitted
that the Preamble to the said Act itself used the word "regulate" and
the word "regulate" would include within its ambit the power to
"prohibit". Strong reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in
Star India¹3 However, it is to be noted that in the said case, certain
clauses of the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services
Interconnection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, 2017 notified on 3
-3-2017, made under Section 36 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India Act, 1997, together with the Telecommunication (Broadcasting
and Cable) Services (Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff Order, 2017
notified on the same date were under challenge. In the present case,
what is being sought to be done was done by a resolution of the Central
Council of the appellant PCI and not by any regulation framed under
the provisions of the said Act. As such, the judgment of this Court in
Star India¹3 is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
54. Shri Maninder Singh further relied on the judgment of the
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench, in Sayali
Charitable Trust's College of Pharmacy14. However, since we have held
that the right to establish an educational institution is a fundamental
right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India and reasonable
restrictions on such a right can be imposed only by a law and not by an
execution instruction, we are of the view that the Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench, in the said case does not lay
down the correct position of law. In our view, the view taken by the
High Courts of Karnataka, Delhi and Chhattisgarh lays down the correct
position of law.
55. Since we have held that the Resolutions/communications dated
17-7-2019 and 9-9-2019 of the Central Council of the appellant PCI,
which are in the nature of executive instructions, could not impose
restrictions on the fundamental right to establish educational
institutions under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India, we do
not find it necessary to consider the submissions advanced on other
issues. We find that the Resolutions/communications dated 17-7-2019
and 9-9-2019 of the Central Council of the appellant PCI are liable to
be struck down on this short ground.
56. Before parting, we may observe that there could indeed be a
necessity to impose certain restrictions so as to prevent mushrooming
growth of Pharmacy colleges. Such restrictions may be in the larger
general public interest. However, if that has to be done, it has to be
done strictly in accordance with law. If and when such restrictions are
imposed by an authority competent to do so,
the validity of the same can always be scrutinised on the touchstone of
law. We, therefore, refrain from considering the rival submissions made
on that behalf.
57. It is further to be noted that the applications seeking approval
for D.Pharm and .Pharm courses are required to be accompanied by a
"no-objection certificate" ("NOC") from the State Government and
consent of affiliation from the affiliating bodies. While scrutinising such
applications, the Council can always take into consideration various
factors before deciding to allow or reject such applications. Merely
because an institution has a right to establish an educational institution
does not mean that such an application has to be allowed. In a
particular area, if there are more than sufficient number of institutions
already existing, the Central Council can always take into consideration
as to whether it is necessary or not to increase the number of
institutions in such an area. However, a blanket prohibition on the
establishment of Pharmacy colleges cannot be imposed by an executive
resolution.
58. In the result, the appeals filed by the Pharmacy Council of India
are dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case,
there shall be no order as to costs.
59. The writ petitions filed by the institutions shall stand disposed of
in terms of the above. Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand
disposed of.
Civil appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1887 of
2022 [Shaheed Teg Bahadur College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council
of India]
60. The appeal filed by Shaheed Teg Bahadur College of Pharmacy
challenges the order dated 23-12-2021 passed by the learned Single
Judge of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Shaheed Teg Bhadur
College of Pharmacy V. Pharmacy Council of India ².
61.
In
view of the judgment29 passed by this Court today in civil
appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 19671 of 2021
and connected matters, this appeal has been rendered infructuous and
is disposed of as such. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19671 of 2021. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Pharmacy
Court, WA No. 746 of 2020, dt. 9-11-2021) [Affirmed]
#
Arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 1387-88 of 2022. Arising from the Judgments and Orders in
(Karnataka High Court, WA No. 747 of 2020, dt. 9-11-2021 and Pharmacy Council of India V.
WA No. 748 of 2020, dt. 9-11-2021) [Affirmed]
++ Arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 14295-296 of 2021. Arising from the Judgment and Order in
(Karnataka High Court, WA No. 746 of 2020, dt. 13-8-2021) [Affirmed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1050 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Chouksey
High Court, WP (C) No. 3766 of 2021, dt. 9-12-2021] [Affirmed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1887 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Shaheed
[Delhi High Court, WP (C) No. 175 of 2021, dt. 23-12-2021] [Impliedly reversed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2570 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Pharmacy
Court, WA No. 100008 of 2021, dt. 18-1-2022) [Affirmed]
+++
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5673 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Gyan
High Court, WP (C) No. 4062 of 2022, dt. 10-3-2022] [Affirmed]
++#
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4862 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Shaheed
[Delhi High Court, WP (C) No. 175 of 2021, dt. 7-3-2022] [Affirmed]
+ + + Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13792 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in
[Chhattisgarh High Court, WP (C) No. 3766 of 2021, dt. 22-4-2022] [Affirmed]
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India [Allowed]
1
2
3
15765
4
Del 684
5
6
7
Del 5646
8
9
11
12 Madhya Bharat Cotton Assn. Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1954 SC 634
13
14
OnLine Bom 2564
15
729
17
18
SCEC 339
19
21
54
23
25
17
18
18
19
19
26
(L&S) 355 : 5 SCEC 589
17
27 State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh, (1967) 2 SCR 454 : AIR 1967 SC 1170
29 Set out in paras 1 to 59, above.