In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE K.M. JOSEPH AND HRISHIKESH ROY, JJ.)
RAJRATAN BABULAL AGARWAL
Appellant;
Versus
SOLARTEX INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 2199 of 2021 , decided on October 13, 2022
A. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - Ss. 8 and 9 - Application for initiation of CIRP by operational
creditor for non-payment/short payment on accounts of goods supplied -
Rejection of, when there is a pre-existing dispute regarding goods supplied
- Buyer's reliance on breach of warranty for refusal to pay the
price/canvas for reduction of price (remedy available under S. 59 of the
Sale of Goods Act) - Effect of
- E-mail dispatched to seller, regarding quality of goods supplied and
damages sustained - Establishment and sufficiency of, to qualify as pre-
existing dispute - Pre-existing dispute - Principles for determination of
- Once the operational creditor has filed an application, which is
otherwise complete, the adjudicating authority must reject the application
under S. 9(5)(2)(d) IBC if notice of dispute has been received by the
operational creditor or there is a record of dispute in the information utility
- Further, such notice must bring to the notice of the operational creditor
the "existence" of a dispute or the fact that a suit or arbitration proceeding
relating to a dispute is pending between the parties - Therefore, all that the
adjudicating authority is to see at this stage is whether there is a plausible
contention which requires further investigation and that the "dispute" is not
a patently feeble legal argument or an assertion of fact unsupported by
evidence - Further held, the court need not be satisfied that the defence is
likely to succeed
- A supply of 500 metric tonnes of coal each to the second respondent
and its sister concern STDPL, were to be made by through the first
respondent; the purchase order in respect of STDPL was dt. 11-10-2016 and
that in respect of the second respondent was dt. 27-10-2016 - Appellant
(ex-Director of the second respondent) stressed on certain lab reports of
tests, indicating that the quality of coal did not conform to what was
promised and which allegedly led to the malfunctioning of boiler - NCLT
inter alia, was of the view that on 30-10-2016, STDPL, a sister concern of
the corporate debtor sent an e-mail to Group Concern of the operational
creditor in regard to the purchase order dt. 11-10-2016 whereas, the claim
was in regard to the purchase order dt. 27-10-2016 - Held, the approach
of NCLAT cannot be sustained and a perusal of the e-mail would clearly
indicate that though it was sent by STDPL express
reference is made to the second respondent also, and thereafter, the issues relating
to the quality of the coal are articulated - Further, the fact that there is no express
reference to e-mail dt. 30-10-2016 in the reply notice given by the second
respondent to the statutory notice under S. 8 given by the first respondent will not,
detract from the impact of the communication - Sale of Goods Act, 1930, Ss. 13,
41 and 59
(Paras 60 to 64 and 75)
B. Contract and Specific Relief - Sale of Goods Act, 1930 - Ss. 13(1) &
(2) and 59 r/w S. 12(3) - Stipulation in contract - When can be considered
as warranty - Condition and warranty - Distinguished between
- A condition is treated as essential to the main purpose of the contract and the
breach of a condition gives rise to the right with the party to treat the contract as
repudiated - However, in the case of the breach of a warranty which is a
stipulation in a contract collateral to the main purpose of the contract, the party
(buyer) cannot reject the goods and he cannot repudiate the contract - Under S.
12(3) of the 1930 Act, on the breach of the warranty, the buyer can sue for
damages - As to whether a stipulation is a warranty or a condition is a matter to
be decided on the facts of each case and the nomenclature "warranty" cannot
conclude the question as to whether in fact it is a "condition"
- Words and Phrases - "Condition" of contract, "warranty" in contract
(Paras 37 and 38)
C. Contract and Specific Relief - Sale of Goods Act, 1930 - Ss. 13(1)
and (2), 41, 42 and 59 - Availing of remedy for breach of warranty -
Permissibility of, even when there is breach of condition - Buyer's reliance
on breach of warranty for refusal to pay the price/canvas for reduction of
price (remedy available under S. 59) - Permissibility of, when goods
already consumed though not being as per specifications
- Even though the breach of a condition entitles the buyer to repudiate the
contract it is open to the buyer to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of
warrant - Held, S. 59 of the 1930 Act, applies in three situations - (i) There
occurs a breach of the warranty - (ii) A condition is violated by the seller, but the
buyer elects to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of the warranty -
(iii) Under S. 13(2), in view of the buyer having accepted the goods, in
circumstances described in S. 13(2), the buyer is compelled to sue under S. 59,
namely, on the footing that there is a breach of warranty
- Held, if parties intended that the property in the goods would pass only after
delivery is effected and acceptance is made and if the case falls under S. 13(2) and
the buyer sets up a compelled breach of warranty though in fact a condition was
violated, it may not be legal to deny the benefit of the range of remedies open to a
buyer under S. 59 of the 1930 Act - Acceptance of goods at any rate within the
meaning of S. 13(2) of the 1930 Act, if it does not constitute passing of property
would not also deprive the buyer of the right under S. 59 - As long as a condition
is violated, be it implied or express, and it is not waived, then, present other
elements of Ss. 13(2) and 59 applies
(Paras 38, 52 and 54)
D. Contract and Specific Relief - Sale of Goods Act, 1930 - Ss. 55(2)
and 59 - Buyer's refusal to pay the price of goods - Permissibility of, even
when there is a certain day fixed for the payment of the price irrespective of
the passing of the property
- Held, even proceeding on the basis that under S. 55(2) of the 1930 Act, this
is a case where there is a certain day fixed for the payment of the price irrespective
of the passing of the property, inter alia, the law does clothe the buyer with the
right to resist the suit on the basis that the refusal to pay the price is not wrongful
i.e. he can lean on S. 59 and set up a breach of warranty and seek at least the
diminution of the price if not extinction of the same - Also, he has a right to seek
damages even on the same breach
(Paras 70 and 71)
NCLT admitted an application filed by the first respondent under Section 9 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ("IBC") against the second respondent. The
third respondent was appointed as the interim resolution professional. The appellant
is an ex-Director of the second respondent.
On 24-9-2016, there were two high seas sale agreements. One was between
Respondent 2 and one R Ltd. The other High Seas Sale agreement was between
the same seller and one company, the name of which is shortened as STDPL.
STDPL, according to the appellant, is a sister concern of the second respondent.
This arrangement, which was essentially made on the representation of one S, was
not honoured. S offered to supply 500 metric tonnes of coal each to the second
respondent and its sister concern through the first respondent. The purchase order
in respect of STDPL was dated 11-10-2016. The purchase order in respect of the
second respondent is dated 27-10-2016. The purchase order contemplated gross
calorific value of 5400. The total moisture content was put as less than 40% + 2%.
Out of 500 metric tonnes, the second respondent was supplied 412 metric tonnes.
The supply began from 28-10-2016 and ended on 2-11-2016. According to the
appellant, the coal was to be used in boilers which manufactures starch and allied
products.
The appellant laid stress on certain lab reports of tests, which were actually
conducted allegedly at its own labs indicating that the quality of coal did not
conform to what was promised and what was more, allegedly it led to the
malfunctioning of the boiler. On 30-10-2016, an e-mail was sent to the first
respondent.
The next correspondence to notice was e-mail dated 3-11-2016. It was
addressed to the first respondent by the second respondent. The first respondent
responded to the communication dated 3-11-2016 by its e-mail dated 4-11-2016.
Pursuant to the same, further supply was stopped. The first respondent, on 3-2-
2018 issued the requisite notice under IBC and raised a claim for Rs 1573279 + 30
per cent interest totaling to Rs 21,57,700.38. The second respondent furnished a
reply on 17-2-2018. Under the reply, it demanded a total amount of Rs 4.44
crores consequent on the coal not being of the quality promised. Respondent 2 also
filed two civil suits, one against R Ltd. and the other, against the first respondent
claiming damages. It was pointed out that court fee of Rs 3 lakhs was deposited.
After exchange of the notices as mentioned in IBC, an application under Section 9
was filed on 30-4-2018 by Respondent 1 against Respondent 2. A reply was filed
by Respondent 2 pointing out that there was a pre-existing dispute and seeking
dismissal of the application under Section 9. The application came to be admitted by
the order passed on 28-5-2020.
The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal ("NCLAT") dismissed the appeal
filed by the appellant challenging the order passed by the National Company Law
Tribunal ("NCLT") dated 28-5-2020.
In the impugned order, it was inter alia stated:
"19. With the above admission in the affidavit, it is apparent that on 30-10-
2016, STDPL, a sister concern of the corporate debtor has sent an e-mail to
Group Concern of the operational creditor in regard to the purchase order dated
11-1-2016 whereas, the present claim is in regard to the purchase order dated
27-10-2016. It is also to be seen that there is no reference of this e-mail in the
reply to the statutory notice. In the said e-mail it is not mentioned that it is in
relation to the purchase order dated 27-10-2016. In the subsequent e-mail
dated 3-11-2016, there is no reference to the earlier e-mail dated 30-10-2016.
In such circumstances, we are of the view that the e-mail dated 30-10-2016 is
not related to the transaction in question."
The issue involved in this appeal was whether the application filed by the first
respondent under Section 9 IBC is liable to be rejected i.e whether there was a pre-
The surest way't legal research!"
existing dispute?
Answering in affirmative and allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court
Held :
Analysis : Sale of Goods Act, 1930
An analysis of the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 ("the 1930 Act")
would reveal the following in a contract of sale of goods. A stipulation in regard to
goods can be a condition or a warranty. A condition is put on a higher pedestal than
a warranty. A condition is treated as essential to the main purpose of the contract.
The breach of a condition gives rise to the right with the party to treat the contract
as repudiated. In the case of the breach of a warranty which is a stipulation in a
contract collateral to the main purpose of the contract, the party (buyer) cannot
reject the goods. He cannot repudiate the contract. Under Section 12(3) of the
1930 Act, on the breach of the warranty, the buyer can sue for damages.
(Para 37)
As to whether a stipulation is a warranty or a condition is a matter to be decided
on the facts of each case. The nomenclature "warranty" cannot conclude the
question as to whether in fact it is a "condition". Even though the breach of a
condition entitles the buyer to repudiate the contract it is open to the buyer to treat
the breach of the condition as a breach of warranty. [See Section 13(1) of the
1930 Act]. Section 13(2) of the 1930 Act then provides that the breach of any
condition by the seller can be treated as only a breach of warranty and not a
ground for repudiating the contract or rejecting the goods. This is in situations
where the contract is not severable. Still further, for Section 13(2) of the 1930 Act
to apply, the buyer must have accepted all or even part of the goods. This,
however, is again made subject to an express or implied contract providing
otherwise.
(Para 38)
Section 59 of the 1930 Act deals with the remedies open to the buyer upon
there being a breach of warranty. A breach of warranty gives rise to a claim for
damages. [See Section 12(3)]. Section 13 entitles the buyer to waive a condition
or to elect or treat the breach of the condition as a breach of the warranty. Section
13(2) of the 1930 Act subject to a contract otherwise limits the right of the buyer
even when there is a breach of condition to sue only for breach of warranty.
Section 59 of the 1930 Act, accordingly, applies in all the three situations, which are
as follows. There occurs a breach of the warranty. Secondly, a condition is violated
by the seller, but the buyer elects to treat the breach of the condition as a breach
of the warranty. Thirdly, under Section 13(2) of the 1930 Act, in view of the buyer
having accepted the goods, in circumstances described in Section 13(2), the buyer
is compelled to sue under Section 59, namely, on the footing that there is a breach
of warranty. Thus, the word "elects" in Section 59 is relatable to Section 13(1)
whereas the words "is compelled" in Section 59 is to be read with Section 13(2) of
the 1930 Act.
(Para 52)
A breach of warranty does not entitle the buyer to reject the goods. The
remedies which he can seek under Section 59 are as follows. He can seek the
reduction (diminution) of the price. He may also seek to be freed from the liability
to pay the price (extinction of the price). In other words, relying upon the breach of
the warranty, he can refuse to pay the price or canvas for the reduction of the
price. Section 59 of the 1930 Act further proclaims that the buyer may sue the
seller for damages for breach of warranty. Section 59(2) declares that with respect
to the same breach of warranty which is projected as the foundation for seeking
diminution or wiping out of the liability to pay the price, the buyer can also seek
damages.
(Para 53)
On whether after the delivery of the goods by the seller and even after
acceptance of the goods by the buyer, the provisions of Section 59 of the
1930 Act can be invoked by the buyer?
If parties intended that the property in the goods would pass only after delivery
is effected and acceptance is made and if the case falls under Section 13(2) of the
1930 Act and the buyer sets up a compelled breach of warranty though in fact a
condition was violated, it may not be legal to deny the benefit of the range of
remedies open to a buyer under Section 59. Acceptance of goods at any rate within
the meaning of Section 13(2) of the 1930 Act, if it does not constitute passing of
property would not also deprive the buyer of the right under Section 59 of the
1930 Act. As long as a condition is violated, be it implied or express, and it is not
waived, then, present other elements of Section 13(2), Section 59 of the 1930 Act
applies.
(Para 54)
Under the law, namely, the Act, if a suit for price were brought in similar
circumstances, the question would arise squarely, whether the second respondent
as buyer could defend the action by "setting up" diminution or extinction of the
price. Could the second respondent as defendant seek to non-suit the first
respondent by establishing a breach of a warranty. Undoubtedly, ordinarily
acceptance of the goods by the buyer, a matter which falls to be decided with
reference to Sections 41, 42 and 43 of the 1930 Act would conclude the matter in
favour of the seller. What however would be the position where after acceptance,
circumstances exist which
justify the buyer in pleading a breach of a condition which is treated as a warranty
or a breach of warranty which is found after acceptance. Take for example breach
of a condition under Section 14(a) of the 1930 Act. In case where the price has not
been paid and suit is brought under Section 55(1) of the 1930 Act, where the buyer
has found that the seller has no right to sell the goods, can the buyer be robbed of
his right to refuse to pay the price vouchsafed for a buyer under Section 59 of the
1930 Act? The answer would appear to us to be in the negative. No doubt in such a
case it would be said that there is no passing of property or that the seller had no
property to pass. Equally, if after acceptance of the goods, the quiet possession of
the goods within the meaning of Section 14(b) of the 1930 Act is thwarted by third
party claims, the implied warranty for such possession would stand violated giving
rise to the buyer a right under Section 59 to seek such diminution of the price or
even extinction of the price. Even a claim for damages over and above the relief of
diminution and even extinction of the price is permitted under Section 59(2) of the
1930 Act.
(Para 56)
Under Section 31 of the 1930 Act it is the duty of the buyer to pay for the
goods in terms of the contract. Delivery and payment of price are made concurrent
conditions, unless otherwise agreed. This means with possession of the goods
being obtained, the buyer becomes obliged to pay the price. [See Section 32.] In
this case, the contract obliged the second respondent to pay the price within seven
days, according to the first respondent as per the purchase order.
(Para 57)
Section 5(6) IBC excludes the expression "bona fide" which is of significance.
Therefore, it is difficult to import the expression "bona fide" into Section 8(2)(a) IBC
in order to judge whether a dispute exists or not. Once the operational creditor has
filed an application, which is otherwise complete, the adjudicating authority must
reject the application under Section 9(5)(2)(d) IBC if notice of dispute has been
received by the operational creditor or there is a record of dispute in the
information utility. It is clear that such notice must bring to the notice of the
operational creditor the "existence" of a dispute or the fact that a suit or arbitration
proceeding relating to a dispute is pending between the parties. Therefore, all that
the adjudicating authority is to see at this stage is whether there is a plausible
contention which requires further investigation and that the "dispute" is not a
patently feeble legal argument or an assertion of fact unsupported by evidence.
(Para 58)
Hayes V. Hayes, 2014 EWHC 2694 (Ch); Bayoil S.A., In re, (1999) 1 WLR 147
(CA); L.H.F. Wools Ltd., In re, 1970 Ch 27 : (1969) 3 WLR 100 (CA), cited
The purchase order is dated 27-10-2016. The quotation is described as
telephonic and dated 27-10-2016. It is specifically mentioned as against the query
where to be used as follows : FBC Boiler. The goods were described as imported
coal. Apart from mentioning the quantity and the price, it is indicated that the coal
must be of a certain quality in terms of its characteristics which we have already
noticed. Under the terms and conditions with statutory details, Note 1 indicated
that the material should be accompanied with a certificate of analysis. Payment
terms provided that it was to be paid within seven days of the receipt of materials.
Delivery must be immediate. Under the heading "Guarantee", it is mentioned that
the second respondent would reserve the right to reject the material at its ground
site
towards any quality of manufacturing defect. The supply commenced immediately
as contemplated in the purchase order, namely, from 28-10-2016. Indisputably,
the goods were imported coal. This could be treated as a sale of goods by
description as the contract for sale related to 500 MT of Indonesian coal.
(Para 60)
In the present case, a perusal of the notice sent by first respondent and the
application under Section 9 IBC would show that the case is premised on there
being a sale, and there was a "debt" owed by the second respondent under the
sale. It means that the cause of action in general law would have been a suit for the
price of the goods sold within the meaning of Section 55 of the 1930 Act.
(Para 61)
On 30-10-2016, an e-mail was indeed dispatched to the first respondent. The
e-
mail was sent by STDPL, the sister concern of the second respondent. This e-mail
has been brushed aside by NCLAT in the impugned order on two grounds. In the first
place, NCLAT has proceeded on the basis that there was no reference to purchase
order dated 27-10-2016 and the concern raised in the e-mail was qua purchase
order dated 11-10-2016 which related to the sister concern of the second
respondent, namely, STDPL. The second reason for refusing the appellant to draw
support from the said e-mail is that there is no reference to e-mail dated 30-10-
2016 in the reply to the statutory notice under the IBC.
(Para 62)
The approach of NCLAT cannot be sustained. A perusal of the e-mail would clearly
indicate that though it was sent by STDPL express reference is made to the second
respondent also, and thereafter, the issues relating to the quality of the coal are
articulated. We also notice that pictures were attached for the reference.
(Para 63)
The further fact that there is no express reference to e-mail dated 30-10-2016
in the reply notice given by the second respondent to the statutory notice under
Section 8 IBC given by the first respondent will not detract from the impact of the
communication dated 30-12-2016. It is not as if there is a dispute about the
sending and receipt of the communication dated 30-10-2016. Therefore, NCLAT has
clearly erred in refusing to lay store by the said communication. On 3-11-2016,
undoubtedly, the second respondent in its own name has ventilated its complaint
about the inferior and the poor quality of the Indonesian coal. The impact of using
such coal on the boiler and about the damage being done to the boiler has been
specifically articulated. Further, a request was made to stop delivery of the goods.
Even advice was sought as to what is to be done about the loss. Thereafter, it is
stated that for any more losses occurred due to the poor inferior quality of the
coal, the second respondent may debit the same in the account of the first
respondent. On the very next day, that is, 4-11-2016, the first respondent wrote
back by pointing to the improbability about the deviation from the quality of the
coal but it was indicated that the further supply was being stopped. Thus, the supply
was effected of 412 MT out of the contracted quantum of 500 MT. The supply was
stopped on the basis of the communication dated 4-11-2016.
(Para 64)
This is a case where there was a contract for sale of goods. The contract as
gleaned from the purchase order related to goods which were sold by description,
namely, Indonesian coal. Parties clearly contemplated that the coal was to be a
certain quality, the details of which are expressly enumerated in the purchase order.
The purpose for which the coal was purchased was also indicated, namely, it was
to be used in a boiler. Therefore, it formed a part of the raw material for the second
respondent. Pursuant to the purchase order, it is undoubtedly true, that 412 MT
was delivered at the factory site of the second respondent. It is beyond challenge
that no part of 412 MT has been returned by the second respondent to the first
respondent. It would be safe to proceed on the basis that the goods so delivered
may have been used or consumed. It may constitute acceptance of the goods
within the meaning of Section 42 of the 1930 Act.
(Para 65)
But then the case of the appellant is anchored in Section 13(2) of the 1930 Act.
The case is that the characteristics of the coal or quality of the coal with reference
to certain objective criteria were indeed specified and was understood as a
condition to be fulfilled by the seller and that those conditions were not fulfilled by
the first respondent seller. It is, therefore, the case of the appellant that the
acceptance of the goods under Section 42 may not detract from Section 13(2) of
the 1930 Act applying to the facts. In other words, treating the quality of the coal
with reference to certain standards as conditions to be fulfilled by the seller, the
mere acceptance of the goods by the buyer may not prevent the buyer from still
contending that there has been a breach of the condition, but since the law permits
the buyer to treat such breach of the condition when there is acceptance of the
The surest way t legal research!
goods as only a breach of a warranty, Section 59 of the 1930 Act immediately gets
attracted. Section 59 of the 1930 Act contemplates a buyer "setting up" a breach
of a warranty to diminish or reduce the price or even extinguish it. If this line is
accepted, it could indeed be said that the decks are not cleared for the first
respondent seller for its claim under Section 8.
(Para 66)
The factum of the filing of the suit, however, cannot be taken into consideration
for the purpose of deciding whether there is a pre-existing dispute under IBC. This is
for the simple reason that the suit was not filed before the receipt of the demand
notice under Section 8 IBC. No doubt, the documentary evidence furnished by the
first respondent, namely, the purchase order indicates that the price is to be paid
within seven days of receipt of the goods. It is true that Section 55(2) of the 1930
Act speaks about a contract of sale where the price is payable on a day certain
entitling the seller to sue for price. This is irrespective of the fact that the property in
the goods has not passed and the goods have not been appropriated to the
contract and whether delivery has been made or not. We may notice, for the
purpose of the limited inquiry we can do, for deciding, whether there was a pre-
existing dispute, to apply Section 55(2) a certain day must be fixed for payment of
price. In this case, the payment terms speak about "within seven days of delivery".
(Para 68)
555, relied on
Even proceeding on the basis that under Section 55(2) of the 1930 Act, this is a
case where there is a certain day fixed for the payment of the price irrespective of
the passing of the property, inter alia, the law does clothe the buyer with the right
to resist the suit on the basis that the refusal to pay the price is not wrongful. In
other words, he can lean on Section 59 and set up a breach of warranty and seek
at least the diminution of the price if not extinction of the same. That apart, he has
a right to seek damages even on the same breach.
(Para 70)
Section 4 of the 1930 Act, inter alia, contemplates that an agreement to sell
becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are fulfilled subject to
which the property in the goods is to be transferred. As far as Section 55(1) of the
1930
Act, it clothes a seller with a right to sue for the price of the goods when a property
in the goods has passed. The suit can be resisted by the buyer on the basis that the
refusal to pay the price is not wrongful having regard to the terms of the contract.
As to when property passes and transforms a contract for sale into a sale is largely
a matter of intention. The rules as contained in Sections 19 to 24 of the 1930 Act
would be employed. The task, however, remains to find out the intention of the
parties.
(Para 71)
considered
The examination of the merits need not transcend the limited extent undertaken
which is to find that the case of the second respondent is not to be brushed aside
as spurious, hypothetical or illusory. We cannot find that the dispute as projected by
the appellant on behalf of the second respondent does not exist. In the teeth of the
e-mails which we have adverted to, and the inference sought to be drawn in
particular as also the lab reports produced, no doubt, from the second respondent's
labs, we cannot also find that the case of the corporate debtor is wholly
unsupported by evidence.
(Para 74)
:
The court need not be satisfied that the defence is likely to succeed. The
standard, in other words, with reference to which a case of a pre-existing dispute
under IBC must be employed cannot be equated with even the principle of
preponderance of probability which guides a civil court at the stage of finally
decreeing a suit. Once this subtle distinction is not overlooked, NCLAT has clearly
erred in finding that there was no dispute within the meaning of the IBC.
(Para 75)
:
The delivery of the goods and the acceptance of the goods by use of the goods
by the corporate debtor being not in dispute, the impact of Section 13(2) read with
Section 59 of the 1930 Act cannot at least for the purpose of determining whether
there is a pre-existing dispute be ignored.
(Para 76)
The appellant, it must not be overlooked has a definite case that, only upon use
of the goods, the defect in the goods came to be discovered. No doubt, the lab
reports may support the appellant. It is not the case of either party that the quality
of the coal as set out in the purchase order is something which could be established
on mere physical examination.
(Para 77)
As far as the contention that no debit note was raised in respect of supplied
goods and that the accounts may not bear out the case of the appellant about the
alleged loss, as a result of the use of the goods in question, while they may indeed
have lent assurance to the case of the corporate debtor, their absence may not
clinchingly rule out the existence of a "pre-existing dispute" under the IBC.
(Para 78)
Here, we must not be oblivious to the limited nature of examination of the case
of the corporate debtor projecting a pre-existing dispute. Overlooking the
boundaries of the jurisdiction can cause a serious miscarriage of justice besides
frustrating the object of the IBC. NCLAT, has clearly erred in not appreciating the
issue, bearing in mind the principles in the 1930 Act.
(Para 79)
reversed
7338, impliedly reversed
3388, referred to
VN-D/69405/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Kavin Gulati, Senior Advocate [Avi Tandon, Anish Agarwal (Advocate
-on-Record), Tejas Agarwal, Ms Meghna Tandon, Mayur K., Ms Vanshika
Gupta and Ami Tandon, Advocates], for the Appellant;
Nakul Dewan, Senior Advocate [Manoj Harit, Vikram Hegde
(Advocate-on-Record), Jaimin Dave, Ms Aastha Mehta, Ms Nooreen
Sarna, Ms Vishakha, Ms Prerna Mohapatra, Nishant Rao and Ms
Deepanwita Priyanka (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the
Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Agarwal V. Solartex India (P) Ltd.
127c-d
124f-g, 127c-d, 127e,
Agarwal V. Solartex India (P) Ltd. (reversed)
128a-b
Ltd. V. Honest Derivatives (P) Ltd. (impliedly
reversed)
124f-g, 127c-d
Ltd. V. Honest Derivatives (P) Ltd.
127c
Mobilox Innovations (P) Ltd. V. Kirusa Software
131g-h, 142d, 142d-e,
(P) Ltd.
150c, 150e, 150f-g,
151a-b
6. 2014 EWHC 2694 (Ch), Hayes V. Hayes
144a-b
Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla (2) V. Bibijan
149a
Sharma
130g-h
9. (1999) 1 WLR 147 (CA), Bayoil S.A., In re
144b-c
10. 1970 Ch 27 : (1969) 3 WLR 100 (CA), L.H.F.
Wools Ltd., In re
144c
Mangilal Karwa V. Shantibai
149f-g
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K.M. JOSEPH, J. - By the impugned order1, the National Company
Law Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as "NCLAT" for brevity)
has dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant challenging the order2
passed by the National Company Law Tribunal (hereinafter referred to
as "NCLT" for brevity) dated 28-5-2020. By the said order, NCLT
admitted an application filed by the first respondent under Section 9 of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as
"IBC") against the second respondent. The third respondent was
appointed as the interim resolution professional and a moratorium
followed. The appellant is an ex-Director of the second respondent.
2. The question which falls for decision is whether the appellant has
raised a dispute which can be described as "a pre-existing dispute" as
understood by this Court in the decision in Mobilox Innovations (P) Ltd.
V. Kirusa Software (P) Ltd. 3 NCLT has rejected the version of the
appellant that there exists a pre-existing dispute which stands affirmed
by NCLAT.
3. The facts necessary for resolution of the lis can be stated as
follows : On 24-9-2016, there were two high seas sale agreements. One
was between Respondent 2 and one Rawalwasia Textile Industries Pvt.
Ltd. The other High Seas Sale agreement was between the same seller
and one company, the name of which is shortened as STDPL.
4. STDPL, according to the appellant, is a sister concern of the second
respondent. This arrangement, which was essentially made on the
representation of one Mr Sameer Agrawal, was not honoured. Mr
Sameer Agrawal offered to supply 500 metric tonnes of coal each to the
second respondent and its sister concern through the first respondent.
The purchase order in respect of STDPL was dated 11-10-2016. The
purchase order in respect of the second respondent is dated 27-10-
2016. The purchase order contemplated gross calorific value of 5400.
The total moisture content was put as less than 40% +/- 2%. Out of
500 metric tonnes, the second respondent was supplied 412 metric
tonnes. The supply began from 28-10-2016 and ended on 2-11-2016.
According to the appellant, the coal was to be used in boilers which
manufactures starch and allied products. The coal is placed over the
boilers in silos which are nearly 15 feet in height and hold upwards of
200 metric tonnes of coal at once.
5. The appellant lays stress on certain lab reports of tests, which
were actually conducted allegedly at its own labs indicating that the
quality of coal did not conform to what was promised and what was
more, allegedly it led to the malfunctioning of the boiler. On 30-10-
2016, an e-mail was sent to the first respondent. It reads as follows:
"Dear Sir,
With reference to 5400 GCV imp coal supply to (STDPL) Dhule and
(HDPL) Jamner, following issues are to be shared.
For Dhule plant : High moisture and powder percentage is to be
found, already discussed to you.
For Jamner plant : Recently supply include high level of powder
percentage and moisture too.
The surest wayt to legal research!"
Kindly consider the issues and please make us assure about
quality of coal should not be down the level. Pics attached for your
reference."
HDPL referred to in the communication is the second respondent.
6. The next correspondence to notice is e-mail dated 3-11-2016. It
is addressed to the first respondent by the second respondent. It reads
as follows:
"M/s Sortex India Pvt. Ltd.
105, Raghuvir Textile Mall,
Aai Mata Chowk, Dumbhal,
Parvat Patiya,
SURAT - 395 010
Kind Attn : Mr Samirji
Sub : Inferior/poor quality of Indonesian coal
Dear Sir,
We have placed an order for 500 MT Indonesian coal to you vide
our P.O. No. HDPL/2016-2017/586 dated 27-10-2016 for 5400 GCV
and moisture condition is 38-40%. But, on receiving the coal we
found that GCV less than 4000 and size of coal is 0 mm 50% and
maximum size is 5 mm to 6 mm only and moisture is 48-50%. It
seems if we receive such type of coal we are facing the cleaning
problem of boiler and due to that nozzle bent and boiler become
damaged. This will occur heavy production losses. Hence, please
stop delivery of the material/coal and advise us what to do with this
loss. If any more losses occurred due to poor/inferior quality of coal,
we may debit the same amount in your account, which may please
be noted.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
For Honest Derivatives Pvt. Ltd.
Ravi Jajodia
Vice-President (Operation)"
7. The first respondent responded to the communication dated 3-11-
2016 by its e-mail dated 4-11-2016. It reads as follows:
"Dear Sir,
It is not possible that the coal is off 4000 GCV, secondly from port
The surest wayt to legal research!"
it is possible that moisture can go up to 42 per cent but not above
that also because at port they are putting water on the coal as per
GPCB guidelines of pollution.
So please take a note regarding this. We have immediately
stopped the delivery, but please inform your transporter.
Regards,
Samir Agarwal
Rawalwasia Group
104, Raghuvir Textile Mall,
Bh. DR world, 1 Mata Chowk,
Poona Khumbhariya Road, Surat-India - 395 010
M - +91-9824102989, +91-9374538264
o - +91-261-2705000"
8. Pursuant to the same, further supply was stopped. The first
respondent, on 3-2-2018 issued the requisite notice under IBC and
raised a claim for Rs 1573279 + 30 per cent interest totaling to Rs
21,57,700.38. The second respondent furnished a reply on 17-2-2018.
Under the reply, it demanded a total amount of Rs 4.44 crores
consequent on the coal not being of the quality promised. Respondent
2 also has filed two civil suits, one against Rawalwasia Textile
Industries Pvt. Ltd. and the other, against the first respondent claiming
damages. It is pointed out that court fee of Rs 3 lakhs was deposited.
After exchange of the notices as mentioned in IBC, an application under
Section 9 was filed on 30-4-2018 by Respondent 1 against Respondent
2. A reply was filed by Respondent 2 pointing out that there was a pre-
existing dispute and seeking dismissal of the application under Section
9. The judgment was reserved on 20-11-20194. The application came
to be admitted as already noted by the order passed on 28-5-20202.
The constitution of Committee was stayed by the NCLAT. With the filing
of the appeal against the order1 passed by the NCLAT an order5 of status
quo was passed.
9. We have heard Mr Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on behalf of the appellant. We further heard Shri Manoj Harit, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent 1. We also have heard Mr
Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the IRP.
10. Shri Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel would draw our
attention to the following paragraph in the impugned order1 : (Rajratan
"19. With the above admission in the affidavit, it is apparent that
on 30-10-2016, STDPL, a sister concern of the corporate debtor has
sent an e-mail to Group Concern of the operational creditor in regard
to the purchase order dated 11-1-2016 whereas, the present claim is
in regard to the purchase order dated 27-10-2016. It is also to be
seen that there is no reference of this e-mail in the reply to the
statutory notice. In the said e-mail it is not mentioned that it is in
relation to the purchase order dated 27-10-2016. In the subsequent
e-mail dated 3-11-2016, there is no reference to the earlier e-mail
dated 30-10-2016. In such circumstances, we are of the view that
the e-mail dated 30-10-2016 is not related to the transaction in
question."
11. He would complain that NCLAT committed a clear mistake. The
error lies in proceeding on the basis that in the e-mail dated 30-10-
2016 sent by STDPL - sister concern of the corporate debtor, there is
mention only of
purchase order dated 27-10-2016. It is pointed out with reference to
the e-mail that the said e-mail indeed contains reference to the supply
of coal to HDPL, the second respondent-the corporate debtor in this
NCLAT)
"22. Upon a bare reading of e-mail dated 3-11-2016, it is clear
that the corporate debtor stated that the supplied coal is not as per
specification and due to that nozzle bent and boiler has become
damaged which would lead to heavy production losses. Hence, it was
requested that delivery of the coal be stopped. It is also mentioned
that if more losses occurred due to poor/inferior quality of coal they
may debit the same amount in the account of the operational
creditor. The operational creditor has sent a reply through e-mail
dated 4-11-2016 and immediately stopped the delivery of coal.
Thereafter, corporate debtor has neither issued any debit note nor
has returned the supplied coal but consumed the same. It means
that after receiving the e-mail dated 4-11-2016 the corporate debtor
was satisfied and kept quiet for about 15 months. It is only when
they received a statutory notice that they filed a civil suit against the
operational creditor."
12. It is on the basis of the said discussion that the NCLAT found that
there was no dispute in regard to the transaction in question and that it
was to avoid the liability that the corporate debtor through its reply to
the notice tried to impress that there was a pre-existing dispute. He
next drew our attention to the purchase order.
13. He would point out therefrom that under the terms and
conditions with statutory details, Note 1 provided that a certificate of
analysis is required along with the material.
14. He drew our attention to Section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act,
1930 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"). He would contend that
under the said provision in a contract of sale of goods, a term may be a
condition or a warranty. He would proceed on the basis that this case
involves the appellant having elected to treat the condition relating to
the quality of the goods as a warranty. The goods in question are raw
materials. The goods were supplied in between 28-10-2016 to 3-11-
2016.
15. He drew our attention to Section 41 of the Act and contended
that a buyer must have the right to examine the goods. He next drew
our attention to Section 42 of the Act.
16. Immediately upon discovery of the fact that the goods delivered
were not in conformity with the terms of the purchase order, the
appellant had registered its protest as it were on 30-10-2016. This was
again taken up on 3-11-2016 and the communication which is
addressed by the first respondent on 4-11-2016 also would fortify the
appellant's case that the complaint of the appellant was not a spurious
one. The first respondent is found making an attempt at justifying the
moisture content of coal not being in terms of
the purchase order. He would contend that Section 59 of the Act
declares the remedies open to a buyer who has elected to treat the
breach of a condition as a warranty and the said provision contemplates
a suit for damages and what is more, even setting up the extinction of
the price.
17. He would point out that suits were filed within the period of
limitation even if it may be that the filing of the suits may strictly not
be a circumstance which is relevant in the scheme of the IBC.
Nonetheless, it goes a long way to establish the case of the appellant
that there was a dispute which was pre-existing and the institution of
the suits following which in fact, a huge amount of Rs 3 lakhs was paid
as court fees would only point to the dispute not being a spurious
adventure. He would also point out with reference to what happened in
NCLT that contrary to the mandate of Rule 150 of the NCLT Rules, 2016
which sets a time-limit of 30 days from final hearing to pronounce the
order, that the said rule being observed in its breach has resulted in
patent mistakes creeping into the order and non-advertence to the vital
issues which were agitated before the Tribunal.
18. Shri Manoj Harit, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the first
respondent, on the other hand, would point out that the only materials
that existed prior to the date of the notice under IBC even as per the
case of the appellant are the three e-mails. The e-mails are dated 30-
10-2016, 3-11-2016 and 4-11-2016. He would contend that the
documents do not show that there is a dispute. Admittedly, there is no
suit or arbitration proceeding initiated as contemplated for the purpose
of Section 9 IBC. Here is a case where the second respondent
consumed the goods supplied even after the alleged deficiency
continued to exist. The alleged variations do not constitute a dispute.
The conduct of the second respondent would show that the claim of
dispute is a sham. It is contended that in the e-mail dated 3-11-2016,
it is stated that in the event of any further damage, the same would be
debited in the account of the first respondent. This circumstance is
seized upon to contend that no damage had occurred till 3-11-2016
which was sufficiently serious to warrant a debit to the account of the
first respondent. Till 3-11-2016, the appellant continued to consume
the coal. In this regard, reference is placed on the words "any more
damage". No debit note was raised after 3-11-2016. This shows there
was no further damage.
19. Even after the e-mail dated 3-11-2016, the appellant continued
to use the coal. The argument based on a period of 3 years being
available to file a suit close to Rs 4 crores as against the amount of
approximately Rs 15 lakhs which is the subject-matter of the
application under Section 9 is sought to be brushed aside as indicative
of the dispute not being a genuine one. If the claim was genuine, it
would have been reflected in its book of accounts. The claim that the
suit can be filed within the period of limitation does not fit in with the
scheme of Section 9 IBC.
20. The purchase order contemplated payment within 7 days of
delivery. There is no denial of liability to pay before 12-11-2016 which
is the last day
by which the account became payable. The analysis reports relied on by
the appellant are sought to be painted as concoctions. Rule 150 of the
NCLT Rules, it is pointed out is only directory and not mandatory.
21. The learned counsel would contend that the e-mails relied upon
by the appellant must not be seen as anything more than an effort by
the buyer to wriggle out of its obligation to make payment for goods
which were received. He would further contend that the purchase order
contemplated production of the certificate of analysis. Therefore, when
the certificate of analysis was present, it is inconceivable how the
appellant without disputing the same could claim that the goods
delivered fell short of the standards agreed to between the parties. As
regards the claim by the appellant that the goods were consumed in
large lots (the case of the appellant is that the total quantity delivered
was 412 metric tonnes out of the total quantum agreed of 500 metric
tonnes and that the manufacturing process is such wherein at one go
large quantity can be put into the boiler) it is contended that it is not
correct. He would further submit that the boilers would contain specific
material indicating the total amount of raw materials which are put into
it. In this regard, he would draw our attention to the findings of this
Court in Mobilox Innovations3 that a dispute which is raised must be
supported with evidence. He would contend that there is no evidence
which can be considered worthwhile so as to not treat the dispute as
spurious.
22. The third respondent is the interim resolution professional. He is
represented before us by Shri Nakul Dewan, learned Senior Counsel. He
would submit that he is making submissions on behalf of the corporate
debtor. After referring to the facts, he would contend that the task cut
out for NCLT is not a mechanical one. While it is not required to
establish the existence of a credible dispute, it is duty-bound to
ascertain whether there is a credible existence of a dispute. The
questions which would arise, according to him, are, whether the
consumption of the coal by the corporate debtor constituted acceptance
of the goods and obliged it to make payment. The argument is to be
based on a prima facie test. He would further pose the question as to
whether the e-mails dated 30-10-2016 and 3-11-2016 evidenced or
any other contemporaneous document evidenced deficiency in the
quality of coal supplied or the coal resulted in damage to the corporate
debtor. He also would draw our attention to Sections 41 and 42 of the
Act. He would point out that there is a purchase order which sets out a
guarantee. This constituted the reservation of the right to reject the
material on the ground. There is no evidence, it is pointed out, that the
right to reject was exercised when delivery was effected of 412 metric
tonnes of the coal. The corporate debtor has accepted and consumed
the delivered coal. As far as Rule 150 of the NCLT Rules is concerned, it
&
is described as a directory provision. The consequence of non-
compliance is not set out. The principle laid down by this Court in
Balwant Singh V. Anand Kumar Sharma6 is enlisted in support to
contend that the results urged by the appellant cannot follow. He
would also submit that the perusal of the accounts does not establish
the case that a loss ensued to the corporate debtor, in that, accounts
do not show that the coal in question was not used.
23. In response, Shri Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Counsel would
invite the Court to undertake a more exhaustive survey of the Act. He
drew our attention to Section 13 besides Section 63 and the substance
of his argument is as follows:
23.1. He would contend that the law provides that if the buyer treats
the contravention of a condition as a violation of a warranty, the rights
declared in Section 59 come into play. The right includes a right to sue
not merely for damages but also to extinguish even the price of the
goods. He would submit that proceeding on the basis that the appellant
has accepted the goods, in view of Section 42 of the 1930 Act, it would
not be fatal to the appellant. He would contend that Section 13(2)
would then apply in the facts. In other words, this is a case where, out
of 500 metric tonnes, the Court can proceed on the basis that there was
a delivery of 412 metric tonnes of coal and the same was consumed by
the corporate debtor. The act of consumption may constitute
acceptance of the goods within the meaning of Section 42. But the
mere acceptance of the goods within the meaning of Section 41 would
not deprive the buyer of the right which follows treating a condition as
a warranty and seeking remedies as provided in Section 59 of the Act.
Such remedies include the relief of the extinction of the price of the
goods. The suit filed within the period of limitation cannot be brushed
aside for the mere reason that it was not filed immediately or rather
that the suit was not pending within the contemplation of Section 9
IBC.
23.2. He would, in fact, point out that the corporate debtor was
having a turnover of about Rs 314 crores in the previous year. He would
ask the Court to bear in mind how unreasonable it would be to still
postulate that for an amount of about Rs 15 lakhs, a corporate body
would risk its goodwill and very existence, unless the dispute projected
was one which was genuine. He would further contend that all of these
aspects must be considered in light of the limited scrutiny of the
question as to whether there is a dispute.
23.3. He would point out that a conspectus of the history of
legislation as unravelled by this Court in Mobilox Innovations 3 would
show the following : Under Section 433 of the Companies Act, 1956,
while a dispute could be raised to resist an order of winding up, the
Court had to consider whether the dispute was a bona fide one. The
legislature was perfectly aware of the law in this regard. The law does
not require the existence of a bona fide dispute to defend an application
under Section 9 IBC. All that is required is that the dispute must not be
got up and spurious. In this regard, he drew our attention to the
exposition of the law in Mobilox Innovations,
Analysis : The Act
24. We may notice the relevant provisions of the Act. Section 4 deals
with sale and agreement to sell:
"4. Sale and agreement to sell.-(1) A contract of sale of goods
is a contract whereby the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the
property in goods to the buyer for a price. There may be a contract of
sale between one part-owner and another.
*
*
*
(3) Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is
transferred from the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a sale,
but where the transfer of the property in the goods is to take place
at a future time or subject to some condition thereafter to be
fulfilled, the contract is called an agreement to sell.
(4) An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or
the conditions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods
is to be transferred."
Thus, till the property passes, there is no sale. Property has been
defined in Section 2(11) as the general property in goods, and not
merely a special property.
25. Section 12 deals with condition and warranty.
"12. Condition and warranty.-(1) A stipulation in a contract of
sale with reference to goods which are the subject thereof may be a
condition or a warranty.
(2) A condition is a stipulation essential to the main purpose of
the contract, the breach of which gives rise to a right to treat the
contract as repudiated.
(3) A warranty is a stipulation collateral to the main purpose of
the contract, the breach of which gives rise to a claim for damages
but not to a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as
repudiated.
(4) Whether a stipulation in a contract of sale is a condition or a
warranty depends in each case on the construction of the contract. A
stipulation may be a condition, though called a warranty in the
contract."
26. Section 13 deals with when a condition is to be treated as a
warranty.
"13. When condition to be treated as warranty.-(1) Where a
contract of sale is subject to any condition to be fulfilled by the
seller, the buyer may waive the condition or elect to treat the breach
of the condition as a breach of warranty and not as a ground for
treating the contract as repudiated.
(2) Where a contract of sale is not severable and the buyer has
accepted the goods or part thereof, a[***] the breach of any
condition to be fulfilled by the seller can only be treated as a breach
of warranty and not as a ground for rejecting the goods and treating
the contract as repudiated, unless there is a term of the contract,
express or implied, to that effect.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the case of any condition or
warranty fulfilment of which is excused by law by reason of
impossibility or otherwise."
27. Section 14 provides for certain implied warranties and conditions
and it reads as follows:
"14. Implied undertaking as to title, etc.-In a contract of
sale, unless the circumstances of the contract are such as to show a
different intention, there is-
(a) an implied condition on the part of the seller that, in the
case of a sale, he has a right to sell the goods and that, in the
case of an agreement to sell, he will have a right to sell the goods
at the time when the property is to pass;
(b) an implied warranty that the buyer shall have and enjoy
quiet possession of the goods;
(c) an implied warranty that the goods shall be free from any
charge or encumbrance in favour of any third party not declared
or known to the buyer before or at the time when the contract is
made."
28. Section 15, inter alia, provides for an implied condition in a sale
of goods by description that the goods must conform with the
description.
29. Section 16 is also relied upon by the appellant and it reads as
follows:
"16. Implied conditions as to quality or fitness. Subject to
the provisions of this Act and of any other law for the time being in
force, there is no implied warranty or condition as to the quality or
fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied under a contract
of sale, except as follows-
(1) Where the buyer, expressly or by implication, makes known
to the seller the particular purpose for which the goods are
required, so as to show that the buyer relies on the seller's skill or
judgment, and the goods are of a description which it is in the
course of the seller's business to supply (whether he is the
manufacturer or producer or not), there is an implied condition
that the goods shall be reasonably fit for such purpose:
Provided that, in the case of a contract for the sale of a
specified article under its patent or other trade name, there is no
implied condition as to its fitness for any particular purpose.
(2) Where goods are bought by description from a seller who
deals in goods of that description (whether he is the manufacturer
or producer or not), there is an implied condition that the goods
shall be of merchantable quality:
Provided that, if the buyer has examined the goods, there shall
be no implied condition as regards defects which such
examination ought to have revealed.
(3) An implied warranty or condition as to quality or fitness for
a particular purpose may be annexed by the usage of trade.
(4) An express warranty or condition does not negative a
warranty or condition implied by this Act unless inconsistent
therewith."
30. Section 17 provides for implied condition in the case of a sale by
sample. Thus, it can be seen that the Act declares or provides for
various implied conditions and warranties.
31. We may also notice Section 19, which deals with the aspect of
passing of property in a contract of sale of goods.
"19. Property passes when intended to pass.-(1) Where
there is a contract for the sale of specific or ascertained goods the
property in them is transferred to the buyer at such time as the
parties to the contract intend it to be transferred.
(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties
regard shall be had to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the
parties and the circumstances of the case.
(3) Unless a different intention appears, the rules contained in
Sections 20 to 24 are rules for ascertaining the intention of the
parties as to the time at which the property in the goods is to pass
to the buyer."
32. Chapter IV deals with performance of the contract. Under
Section 31, it is the duty of the seller to deliver the goods and of the
buyer to accept and to pay for them in accordance with the terms of the
contract of sale. Section 32 reads as follows:
"32. Payment and delivery are concurrent conditions.-
Unless otherwise agreed, delivery of the goods and payment of the
price are concurrent conditions, that is to say, the seller shall be
ready and willing to give possession of the goods to the buyer in
exchange for the price, and the buyer shall be ready and willing to
pay the price in exchange for possession of the goods."
33. It is necessary to notice Section 41 and still further Section 42:
"41. Buyer's right of examining the goods.-(1) Where goods
are delivered to the buyer which he has not previously examined, he
is not deemed to have accepted them unless and until he has had a
reasonable opportunity of examining them for the purpose of
ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed, when the seller tenders delivery of
goods to the buyer, he is bound, on request, to afford the buyer a
reasonable opportunity of examining the goods for the purpose of
ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract.
42. Acceptance.-The - buyer is deemed to have accepted the
goods when he intimates to the seller that he has accepted them, or
when the goods have been delivered to him and he does any act in
relation to them which is inconsistent with the ownership of the
seller, or when, after the lapse of a reasonable time, he retains the
goods without intimating to the seller that he has rejected them."
34. It is apposite also to look into Section 43:
"43. Buyer not bound to return rejected goods.-Unless
otherwise agreed, where goods are delivered to the buyer and he
refuses to accept them,
having the right so to do, he is not bound to return them to the seller,
but it is sufficient if he intimates to the seller that he refuses to accept
them."
35. Chapter V deals with the rights of the unpaid seller against the
goods. Apart from exercising the right of lien thereunder, Section 54
(2), inter alia, entitles the unpaid seller in the circumstances mentioned
therein to resell the goods. Chapter VI deals with suits for breach of the
contract. Section 55 reads as follows:
"55. Suit for price.-(1) Where under a contract of sale the
property in the goods has passed to the buyer and the buyer
wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay for the goods according to the
terms of the contract, the seller may sue him for the price of the
goods.
(2) Where under a contract of sale the price is payable on a
certain day irrespective of delivery and the buyer wrongfully neglects
or refuses to pay such price, the seller may sue him for the price
although the property in the goods has not passed and the goods
have not been appropriated to the contract."
36. It may also be necessary to notice Section 59, which reads as
follows:
"59. Remedy for breach of warranty.-(1) Where there is a
breach of warranty by the seller, or where the buyer elects or is
compelled to treat any breach of a condition on the part of the seller
as a breach of warranty, the buyer is not by reason only of such
breach of warranty entitled to reject the goods; but he may-
(a) set up against the seller the breach of warranty in
diminution or extinction of the price; or
(b) sue the seller for damages for breach of warranty.
(2) The fact that a buyer has set up a breach of warranty in
diminution or extinction of the price does not prevent him from suing
for the same breach of warranty if he has suffered further damage."
37. An analysis of the provisions of the Act would reveal the
following in a contract of sale of goods. A stipulation in regard to goods
can be a condition or a warranty. A condition is put on a higher
pedestal than a warranty. A condition is treated as essential to the
main purpose of the contract. The breach of a condition gives rise to the
right with the party to treat the contract as repudiated. In the case of
the breach of a warranty which is a stipulation in a contract collateral to
the main purpose of the contract, the party (buyer) cannot reject the
goods. He cannot repudiate the contract. Under Section 12(3), on the
The surest way t to legal research!
breach of the warranty, the buyer can sue for damages.
38. As to whether a stipulation is a warranty or a condition is a
matter to be decided on the facts of each case. The nomenclature
"warranty" cannot conclude the question as to whether in fact it is a
"condition". Even though the breach of a condition entitles the buyer to
repudiate the contract it is open to the buyer to treat the breach of the
condition as a breach of warranty. [See Section 13(1)]. Section 13(2)
then provides that the breach of any condition
by the seller can be treated as only a breach of warranty and not a
ground for repudiating the contract or rejecting the goods. This is in
situations where the contract is not severable. Still further, for Section
13(2) to apply, the buyer must have accepted all or even part of the
goods. This, however, is again made subject to an express or implied
contract providing otherwise.
39. Section 13(2) of the Act suffered an amendment by the
amending Act 33 of 19 By the said amendment, the words "or where
the contract is for specific goods the property in which has passed to
the buyer" came to be omitted. Going by the Objects and Reasons of
the amending Act, it is found that the said words gave rise to some
difficulty. It is, inter alia, stated in the Objects and Reasons that under
Section 20 of the Act, property in specific goods in a deliverable state
passes to the buyer when the contract is made. When there is a
contract for sale of specific goods by sample, Section 17(2) of the Act
provides for an implied condition that the bulk should correspond to the
sample in quality. It is further indicated in the Objects and Reasons
that when in such a case property is delivered subsequently which does
not correspond with the sample, Section 13(2) obliged the buyer to
treat the implied condition under Section 17(2) as a warranty, thus,
robbing the buyer of the right to reject the goods and entitling him to
claim damages only. The Law Commission also made a
recommendation that in the case of sale of specific goods by sample it
should be taken out of Section 13(2).
40. Thus, the omission in Section 13(2) by the amending Act 33 of
1963 confines the compelled treatment of a breach of a condition as a
breach of a warranty to only cases where the contract is not severable
and the buyer has accepted the goods or part thereof. No doubt, all of
this is subject to a contract either expressly or impliedly otherwise.
41. Section 14(a) of the Act provides for an implied condition, in the
absence of circumstances indicating a different intention that the seller
has a right to sell the goods. This is in a sale. In the case of the
agreement to sell as would be the case of future goods, Section 14(a)
also provides that there is an implied condition that the seller "will
have" the right to sell the goods when the property is to pass. Section
14(b) declares the existence of an implied warranty that the buyer will
have and enjoy the right of quiet possession of the goods. Section 14
(c) provides for an implied warranty that the goods shall be free from
any charge or encumbrance in favour of a third party not declared or
known to the buyer before or at the time of the contract.
42. Section 15 creates an implied condition in the case of a sale by
description, inter alia, that the goods must correspond with the
description. We may notice the following statements relating to "sale of
specific goods by description" and "conditions as to quality" in The Sale
of Goods Act by Pollock and Mulla [11th Edn.]
"Sale of Specific Goods by Description
It will be observed that the section applies where there is a
"contract for the sale of goods by description", that is to say where
the goods are described by the contract. This usually applies to a
contract for the sale
of unascertained or future goods, but it may apply to the sale of specific
goods also, if the buyer contracts in reliance on that description. This
may well occur in a case where the buyer has never seen the goods and
may also occur where he has seen them, but in the latter case it is
more difficult for the buyer to show that the sale was a sale by
description, for usually the contract for the sale of a specific article is a
contract for the article as it is and any description of it at the most
amounts to a warranty, for the breach of which the buyer can only
recover damages. Occasionally, where goods are sold over the counter
to a customer who asks for the goods by their name, the sale may be a
sale by description, but in general a customer who buys goods in a
shop across the counter is not buying by description. It would appear
that the only sales not by description are sales of specific goods as
such. "Specific goods may be sold as such when they are sold without
any description, express or implied; or where any statement made
about them is not essential to their identity; or where though the goods
are described, the description is not relied upon, as where the buyer
buys the goods such as they are."
Whether statements with reference to the goods amount to a
description of them depends upon the terms of the contract, but in
mercantile contracts they will usually amount to a part of the
description.
Conditions as to Quality
This section, it will be observed, deals only with the condition that
the goods should correspond with the description. In the older cases
stipulations, express or implied, as to the quality of the goods were
treated as part of their description : the Act, however, deals with
them as separate conditions in Section 16(2) and Section 17."
43. Section 16 declares that subject to the other provisions of the
Act and of any other law in force, there can be no implied warranty or
condition as regards the quality or the fitness of the goods for any
particular purpose. This is subject to two exceptions. The exception in
Section 16(1) applies when the buyer expressly or by implication
reveals to the seller, the particular purpose for which the goods are
required. Intimation of this information to the seller brings in the belief
that the buyer relies on the seller's skill or judgment. Furthermore, the
goods must be of the description which must be in the course of the
seller's business to supply. In such a situation there is an implied
condition that the goods are to be reasonably fit for the
stated/particular purposes. An implied warranty or condition regarding
the quality or fitness of the particular purpose can be established by
the trade practice or usage of trade. However, if specified goods are
sold under trade name or patent name, there is no such implied
condition. In this regard we may notice that Section 16(2) provides for
an implied condition regarding the goods being merchantable. The
cardinal requirement to be satisfied in this regard is as follows. The
goods must be bought by "description" from a seller. The seller may be
a manufacturer or a producer. He may not be either. In both of the
cases, the only requirement for an
implied condition to arise is that the seller must be one who deals in
goods of "that description". This is made subject to the exception in the
proviso, namely, that if the buyer has examined the goods, there shall
be no implied condition as regards defects which the inspection should
have revealed. This necessarily means that the proviso would not apply
where the defects are latent. In other words, even in a case where
goods are purchased after actual inspection of the goods if defects are
not discovered then the implied condition would apply in the
circumstances mentioned in Section 16(2).
44. Section 17 deals with sale by sample. Section 17(2) reads as
follows:
"17. Sale by sample.-(1)
*
*
*
(2) In the case of a contract for sale by sample there is an implied
condition-
(a) that the bulk shall correspond with the sample in quality;
(b) that the buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of
comparing the bulk with the sample;
(c) that the goods shall be free from any defect, rendering
them unmerchantable, which would not be apparent on
reasonable examination of the sample."
45. Thus, the Act provides for certain implied conditions and
warranties. The parties may further also provide for express conditions
and warranties.
46. Section 31 proclaims that it is the duty of the seller to deliver
goods in accordance with the terms of the contract of sale. Equally, it is
the duty of the buyer to accept the goods and to pay for them in
accordance with the terms of the contract of sale. Delivery of goods and
payment of price are acts to be performed concurrently. In other words,
the seller should be ready and willing to give possession of the goods to
the buyer in exchange for the price and the buyer must be ready and
willing to pay the price on receipt of the possession of the goods. It is
significant, however, to notice that this obligation though ordinarily
concurrent is subject to a contract to the contrary. In other words,
there can be a condition for payment of the price before the delivery of
the possession. Equally the payment of the price can be postponed to a
point of time after the delivery of possession. Such matters can be
regulated by the contract between the parties.
47. When goods are delivered to the buyer it does not mean that he
has accepted the goods if he has not previously examined the goods. In
other words, if he (the buyer) has not previously examined the goods,
the delivery of the goods to the buyer by itself will not be deemed to be
acceptance of goods by him. He must be afforded an opportunity of
examining the goods. The opportunity must be afforded for the purpose
of finding out whether the goods are in conformity with the agreed
terms. Section 41(2) declares that the seller when he delivers goods is
bound on request of the buyer a reasonable opportunity of examining
the goods. This is again subject to a contract to the contrary. In other
words, unless there is a contract to the contrary if a demand
is made by the buyer for an opportunity to examine the goods, when
delivery is given, the seller is duty-bound to afford such an opportunity.
48. Section 42 specifically deals with when the goods are to be
treated as having being accepted. There are three circumstances
in
which the law treats the goods as having been accepted:
(i) The buyer informs the seller that he has accepted the goods.
(ii) When after the delivery of the goods to the buyer, he does any
act which is not consistent with the ownership of the seller. It
includes a sale made by the buyer of the goods. It may include any
other form of transfer of the goods. It may also include the
consumption of the goods by the buyer. It may embrace the
destruction of the goods.
(iii) The buyer retains the goods, even after a lapse of a
reasonable time of the delivery of the goods and furthermore does
not inform the seller that he has rejected the goods. As to what is
reasonable time is a matter which is to be determined on the facts.
Section 63 of the Act provides that when the Act refers to reasonable
time, it is a question of fact.
49. If any of these three circumstances exist, then, the law provides
that the buyer has accepted the goods. Section 43 deals with a
situation where a buyer who is delivered the goods refuses to accept
them. The law contemplates that if the buyer upon being delivered the
goods ascertains and finds that the goods are not in conformity with
the contract, then he is not duty-bound to accept the goods. On the
other hand, he is entitled to reject the goods. In such circumstances,
subject to a contract to the contrary, the buyer who is entitled to reject
the goods need not return the goods to the seller. The principle
underlying Section 43 is that the buyer need not be saddled with the
liability of expense to be incurred for returning of the goods. This is,
however the case only when the buyer acquires a right to refuse to
accept the goods. As we have noticed, Section 19 deals with the
question as to when the property in the goods passes in a contract of
sale of specific or ascertained goods. The property would pass according
to the intention of the parties. Section 19(2) provides for three criteria
to ascertain the intention of the parties as to when the property passes.
The court must bear in mind the following criteria : the terms of the
contract, the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of the case.
50. Section 20 which in terms of Section 19(3) is one of the rules to
ascertain the intention of the parties provides that in an unconditional
contract for sale of specific goods in a deliverable state, the property
passes when the contract is made. Section 20 further declares that the
postponement of the delivery of the goods or the payment of the price
or both is immaterial to the passing of the property upon the making of
the contract. Passing of property would lead to divesting of title of the
seller and vesting the title with the buyer. The significance of the
passing of the property is also that unless it is otherwise agreed the
goods will remain at the seller's risk until the property is transferred.
Equally, when the property is transferred, irrespective of whether
delivery has been made to the buyer, the risk will be shouldered by the
buyer. This is subject to the two provisos. On each we need not dilate.
Section 55, which provides for an unpaid seller's right to sue for the
price also highlights the significance of the passing of property. Section
55(1) contemplates such a suit if property has passed.
51. Section 55 of the Act provides for a right to sue with the seller of
goods for the price of the goods. Section 55(1) contemplates that
property in the goods has passed to the buyer. It further contemplates
that the buyer has wrongfully neglected or refused, to pay for the
goods, according to the terms of the contract. Section 55(2) clothes the
seller with a right to sue for the price, if the price is payable on a
certain date. This right inheres in the seller, irrespective of the fact that
delivery has not taken place, and what is more, the property in the
goods has not passed. Even the appropriation of the goods to the
contract is not necessary in such a case. The Section reaffirms the
principle that the property can pass without there being delivery.
Delivery of goods need not always result in passing of the property.
However, what is important is dehors any of the aspects mentioned in
Section 55(2) viz. delivery of goods, passing of property in the goods or
appropriation of goods to the contract, the agreement between the
parties, by which the buyer is obliged to pay the price on a certain
date, would entitle the seller to sue for the price of the goods.
52. Section 59 of the Act deals with the remedies open to the buyer
upon there being a breach of warranty. We have already noticed that a
breach of warranty gives rise to a claim for damages. [See Section 12
(3)]. Section 13 as noticed by us entitles the buyer to waive a condition
or to elect or treat the breach of the condition as a breach of the
warranty. Section 13(2) as noticed by us subject to a contract
otherwise limits the right of the buyer even when there is a breach of
condition to sue only for breach of warranty. Section 59, accordingly,
applies in all the three situations, which are as follows. There occurs a
breach of the warranty. Secondly, a condition is violated by the seller,
but the buyer elects to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of
the warranty. Thirdly, under Section 13(2), in view of the buyer having
accepted the goods, in circumstances described in Section 13(2), the
buyer is compelled to sue under Section 59, namely, on the footing that
there is a breach of warranty. Thus, the word "elects" in Section 59 is
relatable to Section 13(1) whereas the words "is compelled" in Section
59 is to be read with Section 13(2) of the Act.
53. It is clear that a breach of warranty does not entitle the buyer to
reject the goods. The remedies which he can seek under Section 59 are
as follows. He can seek the reduction (diminution) of the price. He may
also seek to be freed from the liability to pay the price (extinction of the
price). In other words, relying upon the breach of the warranty, he can
refuse to pay the price or canvas for the reduction of the price. Section
59 further proclaims that the buyer may sue the seller for damages for
breach of warranty. Section 59(2) declares that with respect to the
same breach of warranty which is projected as the foundation for
seeking diminution or wiping out of the liability to pay the price, the
buyer can also seek damages.
54. A question may arise as to whether after the delivery of the
goods by the seller and what is more, even after acceptance of the
goods by the buyer, whether the provisions of Section 59 can be
invoked by the buyer? If the property has passed to the buyer within
the meaning of Section 19 which on the one hand entitles the seller to
sue for the price of the goods, in view of the word "wrongfully" neglects
or refuses to pay under Section 55 read with Section 59, cannot the
buyer in a suit for the price filed by the seller, "set up" a breach of
warranty within the meaning of Section 59 and persuade the court to
either decree a reduction in the price or extinguish the liability of the
buyer to even pay any part of the price. To put it differently, if the
goods are delivered and accepted within the meaning of Section 42 of
the Act, will the right of the buyer arising out of breach of warranty
under Section 59 be extinguished? If the mere acceptance of the goods
results in depriving the right of the buyer to invoke Section 59 of the
Act, then, undoubtedly, the buyer would be liable to pay the price. Let
us assume that there is delivery and acceptance in a given case. If
parties intended that the property in the goods would pass only after
delivery is effected and acceptance is made and if the case falls under
Section 13(2) of the Act and the buyer sets up a compelled breach of
warranty though in fact a condition was violated, it may not be legal to
deny the benefit of the range of remedies open to a buyer under
Section 59. Acceptance of goods at any rate within the meaning of
Section 13(2), if it does not constitute passing of property would not
also deprive the buyer of the right under Section 59 of the Act. As long
as a condition is violated, be it implied or express, and it is not waived,
then, present other elements of Section 13(2), Section 59 applies.
55. What would be the position if, after there is acceptance of the
goods, under Section 42 even if it be a case of express intimation of
acceptance, that events occur which lead to the creation of
circumstances attracting Section 14? As for instance, the buyer is
confronted with a situation where he finds that the goods were in fact
stolen and the seller had no right to sell the goods. A third party comes
forward and substantiates his case that the goods were never the
property of the seller. Would it not be a condition under Section 14(a)
which has been observed in its breach by the seller? Let us further
assume that the buyer has not yet paid the price. Can he not despite
having accepted the goods exercise his right under Section 59 and seek
extinction of the price apart from claiming damages?
56. Under the law, namely, the Act, if a suit for price were brought
in similar circumstances, the question would arise squarely, whether
the second respondent as buyer could defend the action by "setting up"
diminution or extinction of the price. Could the second respondent as
defendant seek to non-suit the first respondent by establishing a
breach of a warranty. Undoubtedly, ordinarily acceptance of the goods
by the buyer, a matter which falls to be decided with reference to
Sections 41, 42 and 43 would conclude the matter in favour of the
seller. What however would be the position where after acceptance,
circumstances exist which justify the buyer in pleading a breach of a
condition which is treated as a warranty or a breach of warranty which
is found
after acceptance. Take for example breach of a condition under Section
14(a). In case where the price has not been paid and suit is brought
under Section 55(1), where the buyer has found that the seller has no
right to sell the goods, can the buyer be robbed of his right to refuse to
pay the price vouchsafed for a buyer under Section 59 of the Act? The
answer would appear to us to be in the negative. No doubt in such a
case it would be said that there is no passing of property or that the
seller had no property to pass. Equally, if after acceptance of the goods,
the quiet possession of the goods within the meaning of Section 14(b)
is thwarted by third party claims, the implied warranty for such
possession would stand violated giving rise to the buyer a right under
Section 59 to seek such diminution of the price or even extinction of
the price. Even a claim for damages over and above the relief of
diminution and even extinction of the price is permitted under Section
59(2).
57. It is to be remembered, that under Section 31 of the Act it is the
duty of the buyer to pay for the goods in terms of the contract. Delivery
and payment of price are made concurrent conditions, unless otherwise
agreed. This means with possession of the goods being obtained, the
buyer becomes obliged to pay the price. [See Section 32.] In this case,
the contract obliged the second respondent to pay the price within
seven days, according to the first respondent as per the purchase order.
The decision in Mobilox3
58. After an exhaustive survey of the legislative history of IBC, and
case law, this Court, speaking through R.F. Nariman, J., held, inter
34, 38, 44, 48 & 51)
"32. In the passage of the Bills which ultimately became the
Code, various important changes have taken place. The original
definition of "dispute" has now become an inclusive definition, the
words "bona fide" before "suit or arbitration proceedings " being
deleted. In Section 8(1), the words "through an information utility,
wherever applicable, or by registered post or courier or by any
electronic communication" have been deleted. Likewise, in Section 8
(2), the period of 'at least 60 days through an information utility
or by registered post or courier or by any electronic communication'
has also been deleted. In Section 9(5), the absence of a proviso
similar to the proviso occurring in Section 7(5) was also rectified.
Further, the time periods of 2 and 3 days were uniformly
substituted, as has been seen above, by 7 days, so that a sufficiently
long period is given to do the needful.
*
*
*
34. Therefore, the adjudicating authority, when examining an
application under Section 9 of the Act will have to determine:
(i) Whether there is an "operational debt" as defined exceeding
Rs 1 lakh? (See Section 4 of the Act.)
(ii) Whether the documentary evidence furnished with the
application shows that the aforesaid debt is due and payable and
has not yet been paid? and
(iii) Whether there is existence of a dispute between the
parties or the record of the pendency of a suit or arbitration
proceeding filed before the receipt of the demand notice of the
unpaid operational debt in relation to such dispute?
If any one of the aforesaid conditions is lacking, the application would have to be
rejected. Apart from the above, the adjudicating authority must follow the mandate
of Section 9, as outlined above, and in particular the mandate of Section 9(5) of
the Act, and admit or reject the application, as the case may be, depending upon
the factors mentioned in Section 9(5) of the Act.
*
*
*
38. It is, thus, clear that so far as an operational creditor is
concerned, a demand notice of an unpaid operational debt or copy of
an invoice demanding payment of the amount involved must be
delivered in the prescribed form. The corporate debtor is then given
a period of 10 days from the receipt of the demand notice or copy of
the invoice to bring to the notice of the operational creditor the
existence of a dispute, if any. We have also seen the notes on
clauses annexed to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Bill of 2015, in
which "the existence of a dispute" alone is mentioned. Even
otherwise, the word "and" occurring in Section 8(2)(a) must be read
as "or" keeping in mind the legislative intent and the fact that an
anomalous situation would arise if it is not read as "or". If read as
"and", disputes would only stave off the bankruptcy process if they
are already pending in a suit or arbitration proceedings and not
otherwise. This would lead to great hardship; in that a dispute may
arise a few days before triggering of the insolvency process, in which
case, though a dispute may exist, there is no time to approach either
an Arbitral Tribunal or a court. Further, given the fact that long
limitation periods are allowed, where disputes may arise and do not
reach an Arbitral Tribunal or a court for up to three years, such
persons would be outside the purview of Section 8(2) leading to
bankruptcy proceedings commencing against them. Such an
anomaly cannot possibly have been intended by the legislature nor
has it so been intended. We have also seen that one of the objects of
the Code qua operational debts is to ensure that the amount of such
debts, which is usually smaller than that of financial debts, does not
enable operational creditors to put the corporate debtor into the
insolvency resolution process prematurely or initiate the process for
extraneous considerations. It is for this reason that it is enough that
a dispute exists between the parties.
*
*
*
44. We have already noticed that in the first Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Bill, 2015 that was annexed to the Bankruptcy Law
Reforms Committee Report, Section 5(4) defined "dispute" as
meaning a "bona fide suit or
arbitration proceedings
In its present avatar, Section 5(6) excludes
the expression "bona fide" which is of significance. Therefore, it is
difficult to import the expression "bona fide" into Section 8(2)(a) in
order to judge whether a dispute exists or not.
*
*
*
48. To similar effect is the judgment of the Chancery Division in
Hayes V. Hayes under the UK Insolvency Rules. The Chancery
Division held:
'I do not think it necessary, for the purposes of this appeal, to
embark on a survey of the authorities as to precisely what is
involved in a genuine and substantial cross-claim. It is clear that
on the one hand, the court does not need to be satisfied that
there is a good claim or even that it is a claim which is prima facie
likely to succeed. In Bayoil S.A., In re itself, Nourse, L.J. referred,
at WLR p. 153, to what Harman, L.J. had said in L.H.F. Wools Ltd.,
In re9 where Harman, L.J., having referred to a previous case,
said : (L.H.F. Wools Ltd., In re case9 Ch p. 36)
"
"... The majority decided in that case that, shadowy as the
cross-claim was and improbable as the events said to support it
seemed to be, there was just enough to make the principle work,
namely, that it was right to have the matter tried out before the
axe fell."
On the other hand, the court should be alert to detect wholly spurious claims
merely being put forward by an unwilling debtor to raise what has been called "a
cloud of object ions" as | referred to earlier."
*
*
51. It is clear, therefore, that once the operational creditor has
filed an application, which is otherwise complete, the adjudicating
authority must reject the application under Section 9(5)(2)(d) if
notice of dispute has been received by the operational creditor or
there is a record of dispute in the information utility. It is clear that
such notice must bring to the notice of the operational creditor the
"existence" of a dispute or the fact that a suit or arbitration
proceeding relating to a dispute is pending between the parties.
Therefore, all that the adjudicating authority is to see at this stage is
whether there is a plausible contention which requires further
investigation and that the "dispute" is not a patently feeble legal
argument or an assertion of fact unsupported by evidence. It is
important to separate the grain from the chaff and to reject a
spurious defence which is mere bluster. However, in doing so, the
Court does not need to be satisfied that the defence is likely to
succeed. The Court does not at this stage examine the merits of the
dispute except to the extent indicated above. So long as a dispute
truly exists in fact
and is not spurious, hypothetical or illusory, the adjudicating authority
has to reject the application."
(emphasis supplied)
The purchase order
59. The purchase order dated 27-10-2016 reads, inter alia, as
follows:
"PURCHASE ORDER
*
*
*
Dear Sir,
This has reference to you offer and subsequent discussion had with
you, we are pleased to place our purchase order no. on the following
terms and conditions.
SI.
Description of
Quantity
Rate
Per
Disc.
Amount
No.
goods
%
1.
Imp. Coal
5,00,000.00
3.14
kg
15,70,000.00
kg
GCV (ADB)
5400 kcal
Total Moisture
(ARB) - 40%
BY WT (+/-2%)
Inherent
Moisture
(ADB) 12% by
W (+/-2%)
Volatile
Matter (ADB)
-38-40%
ASH (ADB) 5 -
7% BY WT
Sulfur (ADB)
1% by Wt.
Fix Carbon -
by
difference
Size-0-50 mm
Shortage
Allowed - 1%
Input CST @
2% AGST C -
2
%
31,400.00
FORM
Total
5,00,000.00
INR
kg
16,01,400.00
Amount chargeable (in words) : Indian Rupees sixteen lakhs one
thousand four hundred only
Terms & Conditions With Statutory Details
Note 1 : Certificate of analysis is required along with material
Note 2 : All necessary document should be mention our P.O. number
compulsory otherwise material is not unloading at our site
Note 3 : Courier name: Professional courier - Kindly mention on
your envelope - Delivered to Jamner professional courier branch
office
Price basis
: Ex-Hazira
Payment Terms
: Receipt of material
with in 7 days
Freight
:
Transportation
: JILANI LOGISTICS
Insurance
: NIL
Delivery
: IMMEDIATE
Guarantee
: We will reserve the
right to reject the
material at our ground
site towards any quality
of manufacturing defect"
60. The purchase order is dated 27-10-2016. The quotation is
described as telephonic and dated 27-10-2016. It is specifically
mentioned as against the query where to be used as follows : FBC
Boiler. The goods were described as imported coal. Apart from
mentioning the quantity and the price, it is indicated that the coal must
be of a certain quality in terms of its characteristics which we have
already noticed. Under the terms and conditions with statutory details,
Note 1 indicated that the material should be accompanied with a
certificate of analysis. Payment terms provided that it was to be paid
within seven days of the receipt of materials. Delivery must be
immediate. Under the heading "Guarantee", it is mentioned that the
second respondent would reserve the right to reject the material at its
ground site towards any quality of manufacturing defect. The supply
commenced immediately as contemplated in the purchase order,
namely, from 28-10-2016. Indisputably, the goods were imported coal.
This could be treated as a sale of goods by description as the contract
for sale related to 500 MT of Indonesian coal.
61. In this case, a perusal of the notice sent by the first respondent
and the application under Section 9 IBC would show that the case is
premised on there being a sale, and there was a "debt" owed by the
second respondent under the sale. It means that the cause of action in
general law would have been a suit for the price of the goods sold
within the meaning of Section 55 of the Act.
62. On 30-10-2016, an e-mail was indeed dispatched to the first
respondent [see para 5 of this judgment]. The e-mail was sent by
STDPL, the sister concern of the second respondent. This e-mail has
been brushed aside by NCLAT in the impugned order on two grounds. In
the first place, NCLAT has proceeded on the basis that there was no
reference to purchase order dated 27-10-2016 and the concern raised
in the e-mail was qua purchase order dated 11-10-2016 which related
to the sister concern of the second respondent, namely, STDPL. The
second reason for refusing the appellant to draw support from the said
e-mail is that there is no reference to e-mail dated 30-10-2016 in the
reply to the statutory notice under the IBC.
We are of the view that the approach of NCLAT cannot be
sustained. A perusal of the e-mail would clearly indicate that though it
was sent by STDPL express reference is made to the second respondent
also, and thereafter, the issues relating to the quality of the coal are
articulated. We also notice that pictures were attached for the
reference.
64. The further fact that there is no express reference to e-mail
dated 30-10-2016 in the reply notice given by the second respondent
to the statutory notice under Section 8 IBC given by the first
respondent will not, in our view, detract from the impact of the
communication dated 30-12-2016. It is not as if there is a dispute
about the sending and receipt of the communication dated 30-10-2016.
Therefore, we are of the view that NCLAT has clearly erred in refusing to
lay store by the said communication. On 3-11-2016, undoubtedly, the
second respondent in its own name has ventilated its complaint about
the inferior and the poor quality of the Indonesian coal. The impact of
using such coal on the boiler and about the damage being done to the
boiler has been specifically articulated. Further, a request was made to
stop delivery of the goods. Even advice was sought as to what is to be
done about the loss. Thereafter, it is stated that for any more losses
occurred due to the poor inferior quality of the coal, the second
respondent may debit the same in the account of the first respondent.
On the very next day, that is, 4-11-2016, the first respondent wrote
back by pointing to the improbability about the deviation from the
quality of the coal but it was indicated that the further supply was
being stopped. Thus, the supply was effected of 412 MT out of the
contracted quantum of 500 MT. The supply was stopped on the basis of
the communication dated 4-11-2016.
65. This is a case where there was a contract for sale of goods. The
contract as gleaned from the purchase order related to goods which
were sold by description, namely, Indonesian coal. Parties clearly
contemplated that the coal was to be of a certain quality, the details of
which are expressly enumerated in the purchase order. The purpose for
which the coal was purchased was also indicated, namely, it was to be
used in a boiler. Therefore, it formed a part of the raw material for the
second respondent. Pursuant to the purchase order, it is undoubtedly
true, that 412 MT was delivered at the factory site of the second
respondent. It is beyond challenge that no part of 412 MT has been
returned by the second respondent to the first respondent. It would be
safe to proceed on the basis that the goods so delivered may have been
used or consumed. It may constitute acceptance of the goods within
the meaning of Section 42 of the Act.
66. But then the case of the appellant is anchored in Section 13(2)
of the Act. The case is that the characteristics of the coal or quality of
the coal with reference to certain objective criteria were indeed
specified and was understood as a condition to be fulfilled by the seller
and that those conditions were not fulfilled by the first respondent
seller. It is, therefore, the case of the appellant that the acceptance of
the goods under Section 42 may not detract from Section 13(2) of the
Act applying to the facts. In other words, treating the quality of the
coal with reference to certain standards as conditions to be
fulfilled by the seller, the mere acceptance of the goods by the buyer
may not prevent the buyer from still contending that there has been a
breach of the condition, but since the law permits the buyer to treat
such breach of the condition when there is acceptance of the goods as
only a breach of a warranty, Section 59 of the Act immediately gets
attracted. Section 59 of the Act contemplates a buyer "setting up" a
breach of a warranty to diminish or reduce the price or even extinguish
it. If this line is accepted, it could indeed be said that the decks are not
cleared for the first respondent seller for its claim under Section 8.
67. However, the objections of the first respondent may be noticed.
Apart from supporting the order of NCLAT with reference to its contents,
it is pointed out that the case of the appellant is a mere ruse, and that
no complaint was raised on the ground and though there was guarantee
under the purchase order, nothing prevented the second respondent
from rejecting the goods. The second respondent not only accepted the
supply of the goods but proceeded to consume the goods. A huge
quantum of 412 MT was supplied from 28-10-2016 to 3-11-2016. No
debit was made in the accounts in keeping with the intimation in the e-
mail dated 3-11-2016. This rules out the case of any loss. There is no
evidence of any loss. The case of the appellant would fall under a mere
bluster.
68. We are not dealing with a suit under the Act either by the seller
or the buyer. We are not oblivious to the fact that the suit has already
been laid by the second respondent seeking damages. The factum of
the filing of the suit, however, cannot be taken into consideration for
the purpose of deciding whether there is a pre-existing dispute under
IBC. This is for the simple reason that the suit was not filed before the
receipt of the demand notice under Section 8 IBC. No doubt, the
documentary evidence furnished by the first respondent, namely, the
purchase order indicates that the price is to be paid within seven days
of receipt of the goods. It is true that Section 55(2) of the Act speaks
about a contract of sale where the price is payable on a day certain
entitling the seller to sue for price. This is irrespective of the fact that
the property in the goods has not passed and the goods have not been
appropriated to the contract and whether delivery has been made or
not. We may notice, for the purpose of the limited inquiry we can do,
for deciding, whether there was a pre-existing dispute, to apply Section
55(2) a certain day must be fixed for payment of price. In this case,
the payment terms speak about "within seven days of delivery".
69. We may incidentally notice that though in the context of Article
54 of the Limitation Act, 1963, a Bench of three learned Judges in
Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla (2) V. Bibijan10 has with reference to the
requirement in Article 54 held that the date for performance which is
refused must be a fixed date. In this case, Section 55(2) speaks about
a certain date which must be fixed in the contract. The clause in the
purchase order refers to payment of the price being effected within
seven days of delivery. It could, no doubt, be said that the date of
payment cannot go beyond a period of seven days at any rate of the
delivery,
and therefore, the seventh day could be treated as a day which is
certain. We need not explore the matter further particularly having
regard to the pendency of the suit, and also, the nature of the limited
inquiry to be conducted under IBC.
70. We may further note, however, that Section 55(2) also
contemplates that the buyer must wrongfully neglect or refuse to pay
the price. Interestingly, it will be noticed that the law-giver has in
Section 55(1) also used the words "and the buyer wrongfully neglects
or refuses to pay for the goods" but the law-giver has further added the
words "according to the terms of the contract" which words are not
found in Section 55(2). Even proceeding on the basis that under
Section 55(2) of the Act, this is a case where there is a certain day
fixed for the payment of the price irrespective of the passing of the
property, inter alia, the law does clothe the buyer with the right to
resist the suit on the basis that the refusal to pay the price is not
wrongful. In other words, he can lean on Section 59 and set up a
breach of warranty and seek at least the diminution of the price if not
extinction of the same. That apart, he has a right to seek damages even
on the same breach.
71. Section 4 of the Act, inter alia, contemplates that an agreement
to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are
fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be transferred.
As far as Section 55(1) of the Act, it clothes a seller with a right to sue
for the price of the goods when a property in the goods has passed. The
suit can be resisted by the buyer on the basis that the refusal to pay
the price is not wrongful having regard to the terms of the contract. As
to when property passes and transforms a contract for sale into a sale is
largely a matter of intention. The rules as contained in Sections 19 to
24 of the Act would be employed. The task, however, remains to find
out the intention of the parties.
72. We may notice that a Division Bench of the High Court of Nagpur
in the judgment in Mangilal Karwa V. Shantibai11 has made the
following observations in an appeal by the defendant buyer who had
agreed to purchase 503 bags of Masur but found that the goods were
-24)
"21. The question whether the defendant-purchaser had an option
to reject the goods because what he bargained for was masur and
not some rotten stinking stuff which was once masur of that year's
harvest does not arise for consideration in this case. For, even if
there be a breach of a condition, the defendant by taking delivery
has, under Section 13 of the Act, elected to treat it as a breach of
warranty which under Section 59 entitles him to a diminution or
extinction of the price.
22. It is settled law that even after the goods have been delivered
into the actual possession of the buyer, the performance of the
seller's duties may still be incomplete by reason of the breach; of
some of the conditions or warranties - express or implied -
whether as to title, or quality, or
fitness to which he has bound himself by the contract : (Benjamin on
Sale, p. 984).
23. The question then is : what is the diminution in price to which
the defendant is entitled under Section 59 of the Act?
*
*
*
24. In the instant case the defendant has set up the breach of
warranty of quality in order to claim a diminution of price under
clause (a) of sub-section (1). He is therefore entitled to such
damages as are available to him under clause (a) which would be all
damages resulting as a natural and ordinary consequence of his
breach of contract in supplying a damaged article or an article of an
inferior quality than the one contracted for."
No doubt, the Court found, in the facts therein, that the property had
not passed. For the purpose of this case, we may not have to adjudicate
and find that the property has passed in the goods to the second
respondent.
73. In Mobilox3, this Court took the view that one of the objects of
IBC in regard to operational debts is to ensure that the amount of such
debts which is usually smaller than the financial debts does not enable
the operational creditor to put the corporate debtor into the insolvency
resolution process prematurely. It is further declared that it is for this
reason that it is enough that a dispute exists between the parties. It is
further the law as declared in Mobilox3 that Section 5(6) IBC excludes
the expression bona fide which qualified the words suit or arbitration
proceedings in Section 5(4) under the Bankruptcy Law Reforms
Committee Report. All that is required is to see whether there is a
plausible contention which must be investigated. This Court has gone
on to declare that a "patently feeble" legal argument may not be a
plausible dispute. We respectfully agree. We are unable to find that in
the facts of this case, that the case set up by the second respondent
was a patently feeble legal argument.
74. Again, following what this Court held in Mobilox3, we do not have
to go to the extent of finding that the second respondent is likely to
succeed. Still further, finding guidance from Mobilox3, the examination
of the merits need not transcend the limited extent which we have
undertaken which is to find that the case of the second respondent is
not to be brushed aside as spurious, hypothetical or illusory. We cannot
find that the dispute as projected by the appellant on behalf of the
second respondent does not exist. In the teeth of the e-mails which we
have adverted to, and the inference sought to be drawn in particular as
also the lab reports produced, no doubt, from the second respondent's
labs, we cannot also find that the case of the corporate debtor is wholly
unsupported by evidence. As to the acceptability of these materials and
the weight to be attached to them, needless to say, we have not
pronounced on the same.
75. When we speak about evidence, we must not overlook the law
laid down in Mobilox3 that the court need not be satisfied that the
defence is likely to succeed. The standard, in other words, with
reference to which a case of a pre-existing dispute under IBC must be
employed cannot be equated with even the principle of preponderance
of probability which guides a civil court at the stage of finally decreeing
a suit. Once this subtle distinction is not overlooked, we would think
that NCLAT has clearly erred in finding that there was no dispute within
the meaning of the IBC.
76. On the one hand the case of the appellant appears to be that the
boiler can be used by putting in large quantities of raw material (300
MT approximately) and this justified the consumption of the supplied
goods over a period of a few days, and yet, justifying the complaint
about the quality of the raw material and its impact on the boiler. The
stand of the first respondent is that there is no material to justify such
a claim. We are of the view that this would involve the court making a
deeper foray into the merits and attempting to find whether the dispute
is bona fide as against it being a plausible contention. We cannot be
unmindful about the impact of Section 13(2). In other words, the
delivery of the goods and the acceptance of the goods by use of the
goods by the corporate debtor being not in dispute, the impact of
Section 13(2) read with Section 59 cannot at least for the purpose of
determining whether there is a pre-existing dispute be ignored.
77. No doubt, the first respondent lays store by the purchase order
requiring certificate of analysis in that in view of there being no
challenge to the said certificate of analysis and there being no rejection
of the goods which was contemplated under the purchase order at the
ground site, it is contended that the dispute cannot be countenanced.
The appellant would, on the other hand, seek to buttress his case with
reference to the lab reports, no doubt, procured from the labs which the
second respondent has set up. The appellant, it must not be overlooked
has a definite case that, only upon use of the goods, the defect in the
goods came to be discovered. No doubt, the lab reports may support
the appellant. It is not the case of either party that the quality of the
coal as set out in the purchase order is something which could be
established on mere physical examination.
78. As far as the contention that no debit note was raised in respect
of supplied goods and that the accounts may not bear out the case of
the appellant about the alleged loss, as a result of the use of the goods
in question, we feel that while they may indeed have lent assurance to
the case of the corporate debtor, their absence may not clinchingly rule
out the existence of a "pre-existing dispute" under the IBC.
79. Here, we must not be oblivious to the limited nature of
examination of the case of the corporate debtor projecting a pre-
existing dispute. Overlooking the boundaries of the jurisdiction can
cause a serious miscarriage of justice
besides frustrating the object of the IBC. NCLAT, has clearly erred in not
appreciating the issue, bearing in mind the principles in the Act.
80. In view of our finding that NCLAT has erred in its finding about
the existence of a pre-existing dispute, the impugned order merits
interference. In the said view, we need not pronounce on the aspect
about the effect of Rule 150 being breached by NCLT.
81. We make it clear, however, that as far as the suits filed by the
second respondent are concerned, we must not be treated as having
pronounced on any factual issues and observations made in this regard
must be treated as having been made for the purpose of deciding this
appeal. We also make it clear that since Section 13 of the Act permits
the buyer to waive a condition, it will be open to the first respondent to
canvass that at any rate the second respondent has waived the alleged
condition.
82. The appeal is allowed. The impugned order will stand set aside.
The application filed by the first respondent against the second
respondent under Section 9 will stand rejected. In view of the fact that
the appellant succeeds on the basis that there is a pre-existing dispute
within the meaning of IBC, we leave open all the remedies and
contentions available to the first respondent in law. Parties are left to
bear their respective costs.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Rajratan Babulal Agarwal V. Solartex India (P) Ltd.,
(AT) (Ins.) No. 546 of 2020, dt. 27-5-2021] [Reversed]
1
(Civ) 311
4
5
6
a
The words "or where the contract is for specific goods the property in which has passed to
the buyer" omitted by Act 33 of 1963, S. 3.
7
Hayes V. Hayes, 2014 EWHC 2694 (Ch)
8
Bayoil S.A., In re, (1999) 1 WLR 147 (CA)
9
L.H.F. Wools Ltd., In re, 1970 Ch 27 : (1969) 3 WLR 100 (CA)
10
11