In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE UDAY U. LALIT, S. RAVINDRA BHAT AND P.S. NARASIMHA, JJ.)
EXPERION DEVELOPERS PRIVATE LIMITED
Appellant;
Versus
SUSHMA ASHOK SHIROOR
Respondent.
Civil Appeals No. 6044 of 2019 with No. 7149 of 2019, decided on April
7, 2022
A. Consumer Protection - Services - Housing and Real Estate - Delay in
delivery of possession by builder - Refund of amount - When to be allowed -
Held, upon delay buyer cannot be compelled to take delivery of flat - Refund
along with compensation/interest is the right approach adopted by Commission
created under 1986 Act
consistently in many cases where terms of apartment buyer's agreement were
found to be one-sided and entirely loaded in favour of builder/developer, and
against allottee at every step - Terms of such apartment buyer's agreement
can be said to be oppressive, constituting unfair trade practice - Consumer is not
bound to accept possession of apartment and can seek refund of amount
deposited by her/him with interest
- Cause of Action - Unfair contract/Unfair terms of contract/Unfair trade practice -
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - S. 14 - Real Estate (Regulation and Development)
Act, 2016 - S. 18 - Housing and Real Estate - Relief/Remedies/Consumer Jurisdiction
-
Judicial
Review/Interference/Consumer/Insolvency/RERA Jurisdiction
Allotment/Sale/Lease/Transfer of Flats/Houses by Builder/Developer - Delivery/Non-
delivery/Delay in delivery of Possession - Refund of Contractual Price/Additional
Payments/Deposit/Earnest Money
B.
Consumer Protection - Services - Housing and Real Estate - Delay in
delivery of possession - Refund of amount - Jurisdiction of Commission -
Power to direct refund of amount and to compensate consumer for deficiency in
not delivering apartment as per terms of agreement is within the jurisdiction of
Consumer Courts - Under S. 14 of Consumer Protection Act, if Commission is
satisfied that any of allegations contained in complaint about services are
proved, it shall issue an order to opposite party directing him to return to
complainant the price or as case may be, charges paid by complainant
-
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - S. 14 Real Estate (Regulation and
Development)
Act,
2016
S.
18
Housing
and
Real
Estate
Relief/Remedies/Consumer
Jurisdiction
Judicial
Review/Interference/Consumer/Insolvency/RERA
Jurisdiction
-
Allotment/Sale/Lease/Transfer of Flats/Houses by Builder/Developer Delivery/Non-
delivery/Delay in delivery of Possession - Refund of Contractual Price/Additional
Payments/Deposit/Earnest Money
C. Consumer Protection - Services - Housing and Real Estate - Delay in
delivery of possession - Refund of amount - Failure to deliver possession of
apartment - Remedial choices available to the consumer - Consumer Protection
Act and RERA Act neither exclude nor contradict each other - They are
concurrent remedies operating independently and without primacy -
Commission has power and jurisdiction to direct return of money under S. 14 of
Consumer Protection Act, if a consumer so chooses - Freedom to choose
necessary relief is of the consumer and it is duty of courts to honour it
- Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - S. 14 - Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act, 2016 - Ss. 18, 88 and 89 Housing and Real Estate -
Relief/Remedies/Consumer
Jurisdiction
Judicial
Review/Interference/Consumer/Insolvency/RERA
Jurisdiction
Allotment/Sale/Lease/Transfer of Flats/Houses by Builder/Developer - Delivery/Non-
delivery/Delay in delivery of Possession Refund of Contractual Price/Additional
Payments/Deposit/Earnest Money
D. Consumer Protection - Services - Housing and Real Estate - Delay in
delivery of possession - Refund of amount - Payment of interest - Interest
payable on amount deposited to be restitutionary and also compensatory,
interest has to be paid from date of deposit of amounts - Commission in present
case has granted interest from date of last deposit - This does not amount to
restitution - Interest on refund directed to be paid from date of deposit
- Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - S. 14 - Consumer Forums -
Exercise
of
power - Relief - Interest - Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 - S.
18 - Housing and Real Estate - Relief/Remedies/Consumer Jurisdiction - Judicial
Review/Interference/Consumer/Insolvency/RER
Jurisdiction
Allotment/Sale/Lease/Transfer of Flats/Houses by Builder/Developer - Delivery/Non-
delivery/Delay in delivery of Possession Refund of Contractual Price/Additional
Payments/Deposit/Earnest Money - Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Interest
Development Authority/Housing Board/Developer - Restitution - Restitutionary interest
- Compensation as interest/Interest on compensation - Restitutionary interest
E. Interpretation of Statutes - Basic Rules - Harmonious construction -
Interpreting statutes provisioning plurality of remedies - It is necessary for
courts to harmonise the provisions in a constructive manner - Particular
Statutes or Provisions - Social welfare or remedial statute - Judicial
remedies/Judicial jurisdictional related statutes
F. Interpretation of Statutes - Particular Statutes or Provisions - Judicial
remedies/Judicial jurisdictional related statutes - When statutes provisioning
judicial remedies fall for construction, choice of interpretative outcomes should
also depend on constitutional duty to create effective judicial remedies in
furtherance of access to justice - A meaningful interpretation that effectuates
access to justice is a constitutional imperative and it is this duty that must inform
interpretative criterion
- Constitution of India - Art. 21 - Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Human and
Civil Rights - Right to Due Process/Right to Fair and Speedy Trial/Right to Legal Aid/Legal
Representation/Right to Free and Fair Investigation/Access to Justice/Judicial Remedies
- Access to Justice, Judicial Review/PIL and Public Law Torts/Compensation
The developer was the promoter of apartment units. Consumer booked an apartment
for a total consideration of Rs 2,36,15,726 and agreed for construction linked payment
plan, which led to the execution of the apartment buyer's agreement. As per Clause 10.1
of the agreement, possession was to be given within 42 months from the date of
approval of the building plan or the date of receipt of the approval of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India for the Project or date of the execution
of the agreement whichever is later. Clause 13 of the agreement provided for delay
compensation. Under this clause, if the Developer did not offer possession within the
period stipulated in the agreement, it shall pay liquidated damages of Rs 7.50 per square
foot per month till possession is offered to the consumer.
The consumer approached the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission by
filing an original complaint. He sought a refund of Rs 2,36,41,379 along with interest @
24% p.a.
The Commission found that the agreement is one-sided, heavily loaded against the
allottee and entirely in favour of the Developers. Following the decisions of the Supreme
Commission directed the Developer to refund the amount of Rs 2,36,15,726 with
interest @ 9% p.a. It is against these findings and the consequential directions of the
Commission that the Developer filed the present appeal in the Supreme Court. The
consumer also filed an appeal challenging the Commission's judgment to a limited extent
for grant of an enhanced interest @ 24% p.a.
The issues for determination before the Supreme Court were:
(i) Whether the terms of the apartment buyer's agreement amount to an "unfair
trade practice" and whether the Commission is justified in not giving effect to the
terms of apartment buyer's agreement as laid down in Pioneer case?
(ii) Whether the Commission has the power under the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 to direct refund of the amount deposited by the consumer with interest?
(iii) Whether the relief granted by the Commission requires any modification to
serve the ends of justice?
Dismissing the appeal of the Developer and allowing that of the consumer, the
Supreme Court
Held :
in many cases where the terms of the apartment buyer's agreement were found to be
one-sided and entirely loaded in favour of the Developer, and against the allottee at
every step. Where the terms of the apartment buyer's agreement were found to be
oppressive, constituting unfair trade practice, the Court has not given effect to such
terms of the agreement.
(Paras 12 and 13)
NCDRC 1164, cited
Having examined various decisions of the Supreme Court which considered similar
clauses in apartment buyer's agreement and following the ratio laid down in Pioneer case,
it is held that the Commission is correct in its approach in holding that the clauses of the
agreement are one-sided and that the consumer is not bound to accept the possession
of the apartment and can seek refund of the amount deposited by her with interest.
(Paras 14 to 17)
The appellant contended that the consumer, having elected to proceed under the
1986 Act, the provisions of the RERA Act will have no application. The contention is made
to distinguish the facts of the present case from the facts of Pioneer, which is relied on by
the Commission.
(Para 18)
In view of the clear and categorical principles laid down in Imperia Structures, (2020)
(Para 20)
From Imperial Structures and IREO Grace cases, it is crystal clear that the Consumer
Protection Act and the RERA Act neither exclude nor contradict each other. In fact, the
Supreme Court has held that they are concurrent remedies operating independently and
without primacy.
(Para 22)
When statutes provisioning judicial remedies fall for construction, the choice of the
interpretative outcomes should also depend on the constitutional duty to create effective
judicial remedies in furtherance of access to justice. A meaningful interpretation that
effectuates access to justice is a constitutional imperative and it is this duty that must
inform the interpretative criterion.
(Para 22)
(Civ) 121, followed
affirmed
When statutes provide more than one judicial fora for effectuating a right or to
enforce a duty-obligation, it is a feature of remedial choices offered by the State for an
effective access to justice. Therefore, while interpreting statutes provisioning
plurality of remedies, it is necessary for the courts to harmonise the provisions in a
constructive manner.
(Paras 23 and 24)
Power to direct refund of the amount and to compensate a consumer for the
deficiency in not delivering the apartment as per the terms of agreement is within the
jurisdiction of the Consumer Courts. Under Section 14 of the Consumer Protection Act, if
the Commission is satisfied that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about
the services are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to
return to the complainant the price or as the case may be, the charges paid by the
complainant.
(Para 25)
The Commission has the power and jurisdiction to direct return of money under
Section 14 of the Consumer Protection Act, if a consumer so chooses. The freedom to
choose the necessary relief is of the consumer and it is the duty of the courts to honour
it.
(Para 27)
The consumer in the present case prayed for the solitary relief for return of the
amount paid towards purchase of the apartment without a prayer for alternate relief.
Recognising the right of the consumer for return of the amount with interest and
compensation, the Commission passed the following order:) "The opposite party shall
refund an amount of Rs 2,06,41,379 paid by the complainant along with interest @ 9%
p.a. from the date of last deposit before the due date of possession till actual payment
on the amount paid before due date of possession and after this date if any amount is
deposited, then from the date of deposit till actual payment."
(Para 28)
For the reasons stated above, the Commission has correctly exercised its power and
jurisdiction in passing the above directions for refund of the amount with interest.
(Para 29)
For the interest payable on the amount deposited to be restitutionary and also
compensatory, interest has to be paid from the date of the deposit of the amounts. The
Commission in the order impugned has granted interest from the date of last deposit.
This does not amount to restitution. Following the decision in DLF Homes Panchkula,
Supreme Court directed that the interest on the refund shall be payable from the date of
deposit.
(Para 32)
modified
RM-D/69402/SV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Jitendra Chaudhary, Ms Shilpa Chohan, Dr Pratyush Nandan, Rajesh
Singh (Advocate-on-Record) and Gagan Gupta (Advocate-on-Record),
Advocates, for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Home Developers Ltd. V. Capital Greens Flat Buyers
Assn.
296b-c
(India) Ltd. V. Ram Trivedi
296a
Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. V. Abhishek Khanna
296c, 299a, 299a-b, 300a
Southern Homes (P) Ltd.
295e-f
D.S. Dhanda
305a-b
Structures Ltd. V. Anil Patni
299b, 299g-h, 300a-b
MGF Land Ltd. V. Aftab Singh
297g-h
Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd. V. Union of India
301a
Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd. V. Govindan 293a-b, 293b-c, 293c-d,
Raghavan
294d, 294d-e, 295d-e,
296g, 297b
Shiroor V. Experion Developers (P) Ltd.
291d, 292c-d
Infrastructure V. Trevor D'Lima
294f-g
Verma V. Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd.
295a-b
294e-f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
P.S. NARASIMHA, J. - These appeals under Section 23 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 ("the Act"), arise out of the judgment dated 19-6-
2019 1 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
("the Commission"). The Commission directed the appellant Developer to
refund an amount of Rs 2,06,41,379 with interest @ 9% p.a. to the
respondent consumer (hereinafter referred to as "the consumer") for its
failure to deliver possession of the apartment within the time stipulated as
per the apartment buyers agreement. In these appeals, we have upheld the
Commission's order insofar as it directed the Developer to refund the
amounts paid by the consumer with interest for the unjustifiable delay in
delivering the apartment. On law, we have considered the interplay between
the judicial remedies under the Act and the Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act, 2016 and have explained the remedial choices of a
consumer under these statutes. We have held that the Commission created
under the Act has the power to direct refund under Section 14 of the Act.
We conclude that the Act and the RERA Act neither exclude nor contradict
each other and they must be read harmoniously to subserve their common
purpose.
2. The brief facts of the case are that the Developer, Experion Developers
Private Ltd., is the promoter of apartment units, Windchants, in Sector 112,
Gurgaon, Haryana. The consumer booked an apartment measuring 3525 sq
ft for a total consideration of Rs 2,36,15,726 in Windchants and agreed for
construction linked payment plan, which led to the execution of the
apartment buyer's agreement dated 26-12-2012. As per Clause 10.1 of the
agreement, possession was to be given within 42 months from the date of
approval of the building plan or the date of receipt of the approval of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India for the Project or
date of the execution of the agreement whichever is later. Clause 13 of the
agreement
provided for delay compensation. Under this clause, if the Developer did not
offer possession within the period stipulated in the agreement, it shall pay
liquidated damages of Rs 7.50 per square foot per month till possession is
offered to the consumer.
3. The consumer approached the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission by filing an original complaint being Consumer Case No. 2648
of 2017, alleging that he has paid a total consideration of Rs 2,06,41,379
and possession was not granted even till the filing of the complaint. He,
therefore, sought a refund of Rs 2,06,41,379 along with interest @ 24% p.a.
4. The Developer filed its written statement before the Commission
stating that though the 42 months' period expires on 26-6-2016², the
purchaser will only be entitled to delay compensation under Clause 13, for a
sum of Rs 4,54,052. Justification for the delay is given by pleading that the
occupation certificate for Phase I of the project had already been obtained
on 6-12-2017, and application for occupation certificate for Phase 2, had
already been made. In the affidavit of evidence, the Developer contended
that it secured the occupation certificate on 23-7-2018 and a notice of
possession was issued to the consumer on 24-7-2018. It was claimed that
since possession can be handed over, the complaint must be dismissed.
5. The Commission, in its judgment dated 19-6-20191, allowed the
complaint after referring to Clause 10 (relating to the project completion
period), Clause 11 (relating to the possession and conveyance of the
apartment), as well as Clause 13 (relating to delay in possession). The
Commission found that the agreement is one-sided, heavily loaded against
the allottee and entirely in favour of the Developers. Following the decisions
of this Court in Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd. V. Govindan
Raghavan ("Pioneer"), the Commission directed the Developer to refund the
amount of Rs 2,36,15,726 with interest @ 9% p.a.
6. It is against these findings and the consequential directions of the
Commission that the Developer filed the present Civil Appeal No.
6044/2019. The consumer also filed an appeal being Civil Appeal No.
7149/2019, challenging the Commission's judgment to a limited extent for
grant of an enhanced interest @ 24% p.a.
7. Assailing the judgment of the Commission, Shri Gagan Gupta, on
behalf of the Developer submitted that the decision of this Court in Pioneer3
has no application to the facts of the present case, as in Pioneer³, the Court
did not have to deal with delay compensation clause like in the present
case. Terms of the apartment buyer's agreement alone, according to him,
would govern the relations between the parties. He argued that no prejudice
would be caused to the consumer if he is asked to take possession of the
property. Referring to the
provisions of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 ("the
RERA Act") and particularly to the Regulations made by Haryana Real Estate
Regulatory Authority, which were relied on in Pioneer case3 he submitted
that the consumer has elected to proceed under the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 and therefore the provisions of the RERA Act will not apply and
Pioneer3 cannot be followed as a precedent. In the alternative, he argued
that the interest granted by the Commission is excessive in both the period
of the grant and the rate of interest.
8. Shri Jitendra Chaudhary, learned counsel on behalf of the consumer,
supported the decision of the Commission on all counts and also relied on
the judgment of this Court in Pioneer³. In his appeal, he argued that the
rate of interest granted by the Commission is far too low and urged for
enhancement of the rate of interest to @ 24% p.a. as demanded by her in
the petition before the Commission.
9. Having heard the parties the following issues arise for consideration:
9.1. (I) Whether the terms of the apartment buyers agreement amount
to an "unfair trade practice" and whether the Commission is justified in not
giving effect to the terms of apartment buyer's agreement as laid down in
Pioneer case³?
9.2. (II) Whether the Commission has the power under the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 to direct refund of the amount deposited by the
consumer with interest?
9.3. (III) Whether the relief granted by the Commission requires any
modification to serve the ends of justice?
Re Issue I
10. Clauses 10.1 and 13.1 of the apartment buyers agreement relating to
project completion period and delay compensation may be noticed:
10. Project completion period
10.1. Subject to force majeure, timely payment of the total sale
consideration and other provisions of this Agreement, based upon the
company's estimates as per present Project plans, the company intends
to hand over possession of the apartment within a period of 42 (forty-
two) months from the date of approval of the building plans or the date
of receipt of the approval of the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India for the Project or execution of this Agreement,
whichever is later ("commitment period"). The buyer further agrees that
the company shall additionally be entitled to a time period of 180 (one
hundred and eighty) days ("grace period"), after expiry of the
commitment period for unforeseen and unplanned Project realities.
However, in case of any default under this Agreement that is not rectified
or remedied by the buyer within the time period as may be stipulated,
the company shall not be bound by such commitment period.
*
*
*
13. Delay compensation
13.1. If the company fails to offer the possession of the apartment to
the buyer by the end of the grace period (or an alternate apartment
within the meaning of this Agreement), it shall be liable to pay to the
buyer liquidated damages calculated @ Rs 7.50 (Rupees seven and fifty
paise only) per square foot of sale area as full and final settlement of any
loss of whatsoever nature ("delay compensation") for every month of
delay or part thereof until the date of notice of possession. The buyer
shall be entitled to payment/adjustment of the delay compensation only
at the time of payment of the final instalment and other dues and
charges payable to the company before assuming the possession of the
apartment. No other claim of any description shall be raised against the
company."
11. On the question of reckoning the date for handing over of possession
of the apartment, the Commission recorded the fact admitted by the
Developer in Para 2 of its reply that "the trigger date for Clause 10.1 is 26-
12-2012, which is the date of execution of the apartment buyer's
agreement". The Commission calculated 42 months from this period, which
turns out to be 26-6-2016. Further, adding the grace period of 180 days,
the time for delivery would expire on 26-12-2016. It is again an admitted
fact that the occupancy certificate was obtained only on 23-7-2018 and
notice for possession was issued to the consumer on 24-7-2018. Given the
factual position and having examined the terms of the agreement, the
Commission found the judgment of this Court in Pioneer3 is a relevant and
conclusive precedent.
12. In somewhat similar factual as well as legal context, this Court in
"6.
6.1 In the present case, admittedly the appellant builder
obtained the occupancy certificate almost 2 years after the date
stipulated in the apartment buyer's agreement. As a consequence, there
was a failure to hand over possession of the flat to the respondent flat
purchaser within a reasonable period. The occupancy certificate was
obtained after a delay of more than 2 years on 28-8-2018 during the
pendency of the proceedings before the National Commission. In LDA V.
M.K. Gupta4, this Court held that when a person hires the services of a
builder, or a contractor, for the construction of a house or a flat, and the
same is for a consideration, it is a "service" as defined by Section 2(o) of
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The inordinate delay in handing over
possession of the flat clearly amounts to deficiency of service. In Fortune
Infrastructure V. Trevor D'Lima5, this Court held that a person cannot be
made to wait indefinitely for possession of the flat allotted to him, and is
entitled to seek refund of the amount paid by him, along with
compensation.
6.2. The respondent flat purchaser has made out a clear case of
deficiency of service on the part of the appellant builder. The respondent
flat purchaser was justified in terminating the apartment buyer's
agreement by filing the consumer complaint, and cannot be compelled to
accept the
The surest way t to legal research!"
possession whenever it is offered by the builder. The respondent purchaser
was legally entitled to seek refund of the money deposited by him along
with appropriate compensation.
6.3. The National Commission in the impugned order dated 23-10-
20186 held that the clauses relied upon by the builder were wholly one-
sided, unfair and unreasonable, and could not be relied upon.
*
*
*
6.8. A term of a contract will not be final and binding if it is shown that
the flat purchasers had no option but to sign on the dotted line, on a
contract framed by the builder. The contractual terms of the agreement
dated 8-5-2012 are ex facie one-sided, unfair and unreasonable. The
incorporation of such one-sided clauses in an agreement constitutes an
unfair trade practice as per Section 2(r) of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 since it adopts unfair methods or practices for the purpose of selling
the flats by the builder.
7. In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in holding
that the terms of the apartment buyer's agreement dated 8-5-2012 were
wholly one-sided and unfair to the respondent flat purchaser. The
appellant builder could not seek to bind the respondent with such one-
sided contractual terms."
(emphasis supplied)
13. The principle laid down in Pioneer case 3 has been
followed
consistently in many cases where the terms of the apartment buyer's
agreement were found to be one-sided and entirely loaded in favour of the
Developer, and against the allottee at every step. The following are
instances where the terms of the apartment buyer's agreement were found
to be oppressive, constituting unfair trade practice and the Court has not
given effect to such terms of the Agreement.
14. In Arifur Rahman Khan V. DLF Southern Homes (P) Ltd. this Court
held that there is no embargo on the award of compensation beyond the
rate stipulated in the apartment buyer's agreement where handing over the
possession of the flat has been delayed. The Court observed that the
Consumer Forums must take a robust and a common-sense approach by
taking judicial notice of the fact that flat purchasers obtained loans and are
required to pay EMIs to financial institutions for subserving their debts. The
delay compensation clause provided for Rs 5 per square foot per month. This
Court found that this stipulation is clearly one-sided and does not maintain
a level platform or even reflect a bargain between the parties. The Court
granted additional compensation @ 6% p.a. simple interest to each buyer
therein, over and above the delay compensation clause.
The surest way t to legal research!
15. In NBCC (India) Ltd. V. Ram Trivedi the Court found that the
agreement fastening liability on the purchaser to pay simple interest @ 12%
p.a. if he failed to pay instalments on time and at the same time, if the
seller failed to hand over the possession on time, he would have to pay
compensation only @ of Rs 2 per square feet would constitute an unfair
trade practice. The Court held that a term of a contract would not be final
and binding if it is shown that the flat purchasers have no option but to sign
on the dotted line of a contract framed by the builders. The Court further
held that Consumer Forums were empowered to award just and reasonable
compensation as an incident of its power to direct removal of a deficiency in
service; they are not constrained by the rate prescribed in the agreement.
The Court held that the compensation could be granted even if possession
had been delivered. The same principle is followed in a subsequent decision
in DLF Home Developers Ltd. V. Capital Greens Flat Buyers Assn.
9
16. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in IREO Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. V.
Abhishek Khanna10 noticed the delay compensation clause, which is similar
to the clause in the present case, which provided that the Developer would
be liable to pay delay compensation @ Rs 7.5 per square foot which works
out to approximately 0.9 to 1% p.a. The Court held that this clause is one-
sided and entirely loaded in favour of the Developer and against the allottee.
The Court concluded that the powers of the Consumer Court were in no
manner constrained to declare a contractual term as unfair and one-sided as
an incident of the power to discontinue unfair or restrictive trade practices.
"34. We are of the view that the incorporation of such one-sided and
unreasonable clauses in the apartment buyer's agreement constitutes an
unfair trade practice under Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer Protection
Act. Even under the 1986 Act, the powers of the Consumer Fora were in
no manner constrained to declare a contractual term as unfair or one-
sided as an incident of the power to discontinue unfair or restrictive trade
practices. An "unfair contract" has been defined under the 2019 Act, and
powers have been conferred on the State Consumer Fora and the National
Commission to declare contractual terms which are unfair, as null and
void. This is a statutory recognition of a power which was implicit under
the 1986 Act.
35. In view of the above, we hold that the developer cannot compel
the apartment buyers to be bound by the one-sided contractual terms
contained in the apartment buyer's agreement."
17. Having examined various decisions of this Court which considered
similar clauses in apartment buyer's agreement and following the ratio laid
down in Pioneer case³, the submission made on behalf of the Developer has
to be rejected. We hold that the Commission is correct in its approach in
holding that the clauses of the agreement are one-sided and that the
consumer is not
bound to accept the possession of the apartment and can seek refund of the
amount deposited by her with interest.
Re Issue II
18. Shri Gagan Gupta, submitted that the consumer, having elected to
proceed under the Act, the provisions of the RERA Act will have no
application. The submission is made to distinguish the facts of the present
case from the facts of Pioneer³, which is relied on by the Commission.
19. This question is no more res integra. In Imperia Structures Ltd. V.
Anil Patni1 this Court speaking through Uday U. Lalit, J. examined the
jurisdiction of Consumer Forums vis-à-vis the specific remedies created
under the RERA Act. This judgment comprehensively deals with all aspects
of parallel remedies available to the consumers under the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986, and the RERA Act, 2016. In Imperia Structures11, also,
like in the present case, the proceedings arose out of the decision of the
Commission under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. After a comparative
analysis of both the statutes, this Court held as under : (Imperial Structures
"23. It has consistently been held by this Court that the remedies
available under the provisions of the CP Act are additional remedies over
and above the other remedies including those made available under any
special statutes; and that the availability of an alternate remedy is no bar
in entertaining a complaint under the CP Act.
24. Before we consider whether the provisions of the RERA Act have
made any change in the legal position stated in the preceding paragraph,
we may note that an allottee placed in circumstances similar to that of
the complainants, could have initiated the following proceedings before
the RERA Act came into force:
(A) If he satisfied the requirements of being a "consumer" under
the CP Act, he could have initiated proceedings under the CP Act in
addition to normal civil remedies.
(B) However, if he did not fulfil the requirements of being a
"consumer", he could initiate and avail only normal civil remedies.
(C) If the agreement with the developer or the builder provided for
arbitration:
(i) in cases covered under Clause (B) hereinabove, he could
initiate or could be called upon to invoke the remedies in
arbitration.
(ii) in cases covered under Clause (A) hereinabove, in accordance
with law laid down in Emaar MGF Land Ltd. V. Aftab Singh12 he
could still choose to proceed under the CP Act.
25. In terms of Section 18 of the RERA Act, if a promoter fails to
complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment duly completed
by the date specified in the agreement, the promoter would be liable, on
demand, to return the amount received by him in respect of that
apartment if the allottee wishes to withdraw from the Project. Such right
of an allottee is specifically made 'without prejudice to any other remedy
available to him'. The right so given to the allottee is unqualified and if
availed, the money deposited by the allottee has to be refunded with
interest at such rate as may be prescribed. The proviso to Section 18(1)
contemplates a situation where the allottee does not intend to withdraw
from the Project. In that case he is entitled to and must be paid interest
for every month of delay till the handing over of the possession. It is up
to the allottee to proceed either under Section 18(1) or under proviso to
Section 18(1). The case of Himanshu Giri came under the latter category.
The RERA Act thus definitely provides a remedy to an allottee who wishes
to withdraw from the Project or claim return on his investment.
26. It is, therefore, required to be considered whether the remedy so
provided under the RERA Act to an allottee is the only and exclusive
modality to raise a grievance and whether the provisions of the RERA Act
bar consideration of the grievance of an allottee by other fora.
*
*
*
30. On the strength of the law so declared, Section 79 of the RERA Act
does not in any way bar the Commission or Forum under the provisions of
the CP Act to entertain any complaint.
*
*
*
34. It is true that some special authorities are created under the RERA
Act for the regulation and promotion of the real estate sector and the
issues concerning a registered project are specifically entrusted to
functionaries under the RERA Act. But for the present purposes, we must
go by the purport of Section 18 of the RERA Act. Since it gives a right
'without prejudice to anv other remedy available'. in effect. such other
remedy is acknowledged and saved subject always to the applicability of
Section 79.
*
*
*
37. We may now consider the effect of the registration of the Project
under the RERA Act. In the present case the apartments were booked by
the complainants in 2011-2012 and the builder-buyer agreements were
entered into in November 2013. As promised, the construction should
have been completed in 42 months. The period had expired well before
the Project was registered under the provisions of the RERA Act. Merely
because the registration under the RERA Act is valid till 31-12-2020 does
not mean that the entitlement of the allottees concerned to maintain an
action stands deferred. It is relevant to note that even for the purposes of
Section 18, the period has to be reckoned in terms of the agreement and
not the registration. Condition (x) of the letter dated 17-11-2017 also
entitles an allottee in same fashion. Therefore, the entitlement of the
complainants must be considered in the light of the terms of the builder-
buyer agreements and was rightly dealt with by the Commission."
(emphasis supplied)
20. In view of the clear and categorical principles laid down in Imperial
Structures case¹¹, the submissions made on behalf of the Developer have to
be rejected. This position has also been affirmed in IREO Grace10. In IREO
Grace10 this Court had an occasion to consider the question as to whether,
the provisions of the RERA Act, must be given primacy over the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986. After re-examining the provisions of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 and the RERA Act, and following the principles laid
down in Imperia Structures case¹¹ the Court held as under : (Imperial
"37. We will now consider the provisions of the RERA Act, which was
brought into force on 1-5-2016. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the RERA Act, 2016 read as follows:
`The Statement of Objects and Reasons.-The real estate sector
plays a catalytic role in fulfilling the need and demand for housing and
infrastructure in the country. While this sector has grown significantly
in recent years, it has been largely unregulated, with absence of
professionalism and standardisation and lack of adequate consumer
protection. Though the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is available as a
forum to the buyers in the real estate market, the recourse is only
curative and is not adequate to address all the concerns of buyers and
promoters in that sector. The lack of standardisation has been a
constraint to the healthy and orderly growth of industry. Therefore, the
need for regulating the sector has been emphasised in various forums.
2. In view of the above, it becomes necessary to have a Central
legislation, namely, the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill,
2013 in the interests of effective consumer protection, uniformity and
standardisation of business practices and the transactions in the real
estate sector. The proposed Bill provides for the establishment of the Real
Estate Regulatory Authority (the Authority) for regulation and promotion
of real estate sector and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as
the case may be, in an efficient and transparent manner and to protect
the interest of consumers in real estate sector and establish the Real
Estate Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or
orders of the Authority."
37.1. Section 18 of the RERA Act, 2016 provides the remedy of refund
with interest and compensation to allottees, when a developer fails to
complete the construction or give possession as per the agreement of
sale. The remedies under Section 18 are 'without prejudice to any other
remedy available'."
(emphasis in original and supplied)
21. In coming to its conclusions, the three-Judge Bench relied on the
judgment of Imperial Structures case¹¹ which clarified and declared that
Section 18 of the RERA Act imposed a liability on the promoter to return the
amount with interest to the allottee upon its failure to give possession in
accordance with the terms of the agreement. The expression "without
prejudice
to any other remedy" available in Section 18 of the RERA Act is very
important and while noting the same the Court observed as under : (IREO
"42. In a recent judgment delivered by this Court in Imperia
Structures Ltd. V. Anil Patni11 it was held that remedies under the
Consumer Protection Act were in addition to the remedies available under
special statutes. The absence of a bar under Section 79 of the RERA Act
to the initiation of proceedings before a fora which is not a civil court,
read with Section 88 of the RERA Act makes the position clear. Section
18 of the RERA Act specifies that the remedies are 'without prejudice to
any other remedy available'. We place reliance on this judgment,... "
(emphasis supplied)
22. From the two decisions referred to by us, it is crystal clear that the
Consumer Protection Act and the RERA Act neither exclude nor contradict
each other. In fact, this Court has held that they are concurrent remedies
operating independently and without primacy. When statutes provisioning
judicial remedies fall for construction, the choice of the interpretative
outcomes should also depend on the constitutional duty to create effective
judicial remedies in furtherance of access to justice. A meaningful
interpretation that effectuates access to justice is a constitutional imperative
and it is this duty that must inform the interpretative criterion.
23. When statutes provide more than one judicial fora for effectuating a
right or to enforce a duty-obligation, it is a feature of remedial choices
offered by the State for an effective access to justice. Therefore, while
interpreting statutes provisioning plurality of remedies, it is necessary for
courts to harmonise the provisions in a constructive manner. It is beneficial
to juxtapose the preambular objects of the Consumer Protection Act and the
RERA Act to appreciate the commonality of the objects that both these
statutes are to subserve:
"The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
The Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act, 2016
An Act to provide for the better
An Act to establish the Real Estate
protection of the interests of
Regulatory Authority for regulation
consumers and for that purpose to
and promotion of the real estate
make
provision
for
the
sector and to ensure sale of plot,
establishment of consumer councils
apartment or building, as the case
and other authorities for the
may be, or sale of real estate
settlement of consumers' disputes
project, in an efficient and
and
for
matters
connected
transparent manner and to protect
therewith.
the interest of consumers in the real
estate sector and to establish an
adjudicating mechanism for speedy
dispute redressal and also to
establish the appellate tribunal to
hear appeals from the decisions,
directions or orders of the Real
Estate Regulatory Authority and the
adjudicating officer and for matters
connected therewith or incidental
thereto."
24. In this context, the observation of this Court in Pioneer Urban Land &
Infrastructure Ltd. V. Union of India¹3 where the Court was called upon to
consider the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, the
RERA Act, 2016 and the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is noteworthy
:
"100. RERA is to be read harmoniously with the Code, as amended by
the Amendment Act. It is only in the event of conflict that the code will
prevail over RERA. Remedies that are given to allottees of
flats/apartments are therefore concurrent remedies, such allottees of
flats/apartments being in a position to avail of remedies under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, RERA as well as the triggering of the
Code."
(emphasis supplied)
25. We may hasten to clarify that the power to direct refund of the
amount and to compensate a consumer for the deficiency in not delivering
the apartment as per the terms of agreement is within the jurisdiction of the
Consumer Courts. Under Section 14 of the Consumer Protection Act, if the
Commission
is
satisfied
that any of the allegations contained in the
complaint about the services are proved, it shall issue an order to the
opposite party directing him to, return to the complainant the price or as the
case may be, the charges paid by the complainant. "Deficiency" is defined
under Section 2(g) to include any shortcoming or inadequacy in
performance which has been undertaken by a person in pursuance of a
contract or otherwise relating to any service. These two provisions are
14
reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference. It is clear
from the statutory position that the Commission is empowered to direct
refund of the price or the charges paid by the consumer.
26. A consumer invoking the jurisdiction of the Commission can seek
such reliefs as he/she considers appropriate. A consumer can pray for refund
of the money with interest and compensation. The consumer could also ask
for possession of the apartment with compensation. The consumer can also
make a prayer for both in the alternative. If a consumer prays for refund of
the amount, without an alternative prayer, the Commission will recognise
such a right and grant it, of course subject to the merits of the case. If a
consumer seeks alternative reliefs, the Commission will consider the matter
in the facts and circumstances of the case and will pass appropriate orders
as justice demands. This position is similar to the mandate under Section 18
of the RERA Act 15
with respect to which the Court clarified the position in para 25 of Imperia
case referred to hereinabove.
27. We have referred to the legal regime under the Consumer Protection
Act, only to show that the Commission has the power and jurisdiction to
direct return of money under Section 14 of the Consumer Protection Act, if a
consumer so chooses. The freedom to choose the necessary relief is of the
consumer and it is the duty of the courts to honour it.
28. The consumer in the present case prayed for the solitary relief for
return of the amount paid towards purchase of the apartment without a
prayer
for alternate relief. 16 Recognising the right of the consumer for return
of the amount with interest and compensation, the Commission passed an
order directing the Developer as under:
"The opposite party shall refund an amount of Rs 2,06,41,379 paid by
the complainant along with interest @ 9% p.a. from the date of last
deposit before the due date of possession till actual payment on the
amount paid before due date of possession and after this date if any
amount is deposited, then from the date of deposit till actual payment."
29. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the
Commission has correctly exercised its power and jurisdiction in passing the
above directions for refund of the amount with interest.
Re Issue III
30. In the appeal filed by the consumer, the learned counsel prayed
that : (i) the payment of interest must be from the date of payment of each
instalment; and (ii) the rate of interest must be 24% p.a. He has referred to
the dates on which he has made payments, and sought interest from the
said dates:
Details of payment made to the respondent
Date
Particulars
Cheque
TDS
Total Amount
Amount
Amount
9-6-
State Bank of India Ch.
11,00,000.00
Nil/NA
11,00,000.00
2012
No. 976226
8-8-
State Bank of India Ch.
11,98,457.00
Nil/NA
11,98,457.00
2012
No. 976245
16-1
State Bank of India Ch.
17,81,531.00
Nil/NA
17,81,531.00
-
No. 976251
2013
2-9-
State Bank of India Ch.
17,74,289.00
17,923.00
17,92,212.00
2013
No. 602777
16-1
State Bank of India Ch.
17,74,290.00
17,923.00
17,92,213.00
-
No. 506049
2014
19-4
State Bank of India Ch.
17,74,290.00
17,923.00
17,92,213.00
-
No. 506055
2014
24-7
Punjab National Bank Ch.
14,56,709.00
14,714.00
14,71,423.00
-
No. 806197
2014
22-9
Punjab National Bank Ch.
14,56,709.00
14,715.00
14,71,424.00
-
No. 806204
2014
15-
Punjab National Bank Ch.
14,56,706.00
14,715.00
14,71,421.00
12-
No. 883394
2014
9-2-
Punjab National Bank Ch.
24,14,594.00
24,390.00
24,38,984.00
2015
No. 212657
16-2
EFT No.
9819.00
100.00
9919.00
-
BKIDN15045404506
2015
4-4-
EFT No.
12,04,780.00
12,169.00
12,16,949.00
2015
SBINR520150404130637
15-7
EFT No.
6,44,134.00
10,135.00
6,54,269.00
-
SBIN615196779388
2015
14-8
EFT No.
12,21,122.00
11,735.00
12,32,857.00
-
SBIN815226374771
2015
31-
-
EFT No.
11,92,402.00
11,735.00
12,04,137.00
10-
SBIN415304825817
2015
8-6-
EFT No. 616019949933
13,370.00
Nil/NA
13,370.00
2016
Total : Rs 2,06,41,379 (Rupees two crores six lakhs forty-one
thousand three hundred and seventy-nine only)
31. On the other hand, the appellant Developer submitted that (i) period
for interest should be linked to the estimated date of possession and not the
date of payments, and (ii) the rate of interest must be the rate provided in
the Interest Act, 1978.
32. We are of the opinion that for the interest payable on the amount
deposited to be restitutionary and also compensatory, interest has to be
paid from the date of the deposit of the amounts. The Commission in the
order impugned has granted interest from the date of last deposit. We find
that this does not amount to restitution. Following the decision in DLF
Homes Panchkula (P) Ltd. V. D.S. Dhanda¹7 and in modification of the
direction issued by the Commission, we direct that the interest on the
refund shall be payable from the dates of deposit. Therefore, the appeal filed
by purchaser deserves to be partly allowed. The interests shall be payable
from the dates of such deposits.
33. At the same time, we are of the opinion that the interest of 9%
granted by the Commission is fair and just and we find no reason to
interfere in the appeal filed by the consumer for enhancement of interest.
34. We were informed that the appellant Developer deposited a sum of
Rs 50,000 in the Registry of this Court as per the proviso to Section 23 of
the Act. This amount shall be made over to the respondent consumer, to be
adjusted against the final amount payable by the Developer to the
consumer.
35. In view of the above, Civil Appeal No. 6044 of 2019 filed by the
appellant Developer is dismissed and the appeal filed by the consumer
being Civil Appeal No. 7149 of 2019 is allowed in part as indicated above.
The parties shall bear their own costs.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Sushma Ashok Shiroor V. Experion Developers (P) Ltd.,
No. 2648 of 2017, dt. 19-6-2019) [Modified]
1
2
The Commission in the impugned order has recorded the statement of the Developer in the reply
dated 16-2-2018 raising preliminary objections where it admitted that the "The trigger date for
Clause 10.1 is 26-12-2012 which is the date of execution of the apartment buyer's agreement."
3
4
7
8
9
(Civ) 397
10
(Civ) 1
14
'14. Finding of the District Forum.-(1) If, after the proceedings conducted under Section 13,
the District Forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects
specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about the
services are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to [do] one or more
of the following things, namely:
(a)-(b)
*
*
*
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid by the
complainant;
*
*
(hb) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury
has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently:
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than five per cent of the
value of such defective goods sold or services provided, as the case may be, to such consumers:
Provided further that the amount so obtained shall be credited in favour of such person and utilised
in such manner as may be prescribed.
*
*
(i) to provide for adequate costs to parties."
"2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
*
*
*
(g) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature
and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time
being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or
otherwise in relation to any service;"
15 "18. Return of amount and compensation.-(1 If the promoter fails to complete or is unable
to give possession of an apartment, plot or building-
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale or, as the case may be, duly
completed by the date specified therein; or
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or
revocation of the registration under this Act or for any other reason,
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in case the allottee wishes to withdraw from the
project, without prejudice to any other remedy available, to return the amount received by him in
respect of that apartment, plot, building, as the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be
prescribed in this behalf including compensation in the manner as provided under this Act:
Provided that where an allottee does not intend to withdraw from the project, he shall be paid, by
the promoter, interest for every month of delay, till the handing over of the possession, at such
rate as may be prescribed.
(2) The promoter shall compensate the allottees in case of any loss caused to him due to defective
title of the land, on which the project is being developed or has been developed, in the manner as
provided under this Act, and the claim for compensation under this sub-section shall not be barred
by limitation provided under any law for the time being in force.
(3) If the promoter fails to discharge any other obligations imposed on him under this Act or the
Rules or Regulations made thereunder or in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement for sale, he shall be liable to pay such compensation to the allottees, in the manner as
provided under this Act."
16
The prayer made by the consumer before the Commission is extracted herein for ready
reference:
"Prayer : It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Forum may be graciously
be pleased to; (a) Hold the opposite party guilty of unfair and restrictive trade practice as
despite taking more than Rs 2,06,41,379 they have not completed the construction in 42
months as promised in the apartment buyer's agreement. (b) Hold the opposite party guilty of
cheating, misleading and responsible for deficiency in service as on one hand they failed to
complete the construction in terms of the agreement and on the other hand they have charged
the complainant more than Rs 2,06,41,379. (c) Direct the opposite party to refund the amount
of Rs 2,06,41,379 paid to the opposite party along with interest @ 24% p.a. totalling to Rs
3,68,32,815 (Rupees three crores sixty-eight lakhs thirty-two thousand eight hundred and
fifteen only); (d) The complainant be awarded future as well as pendente lite interest @ 24 %
p.a. (e) Pay a sum of Rs 5,00,000 towards cost of the complaint. (f) Pass such other and
further order(s) as this Hon'ble Forum may deem fit and proper under the facts and
circumstances of the case in favour of the complainant and against the opposite party."
17