In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE AJAY RASTOGI AND VIKRAM NATH, JJ.)
AJMAL
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF KERALA
Respondent.
Criminal Appeals No. 1838 of 2019 with No. 1839 of 2019 and
with No. 1840 of 2019++, decided on July 12, 2022
A. Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 299 and 300 - Culpable homicide, or, murder
- Determination of - Principles for - Clarified - Use of the word "likely" in
several places in S. 299 and absence thereof in S. 300 - Significance of,
explained - Intention to cause death - Circumstances (non-exhaustive)
from which may be inferred - Words and Phrases - "Likely"
B. Penal Code, 1860 - Ss. 302 or 304, 323, 324, 341 and 427 r/w S. 34
- Murder or culpable homicide - Absence of premeditation - Effect of -
Incident of assault by means of sticks and a brick, resulting in one death
and three injured, proved by prompt FIR, recovery of weapons, ocular and
medical evidence - Considering entire materials on record, incident, held,
occurred without premeditation of mind - Resultantly, proper conviction of
the appellants, held, would be under S. 304 Pt. II - Sentence reduced to
period already undergone, of 7 yrs - Conviction and sentence for other
offences, maintained
- Incident, firstly occurred around 9.00 p.m., when a verbal altercation took
place between PW 1 and A-9, because of overtaking of the vehicles of one party
and the other - Thereafter, both parties went in separate directions, but later on,
at about 10.45 p.m., when the deceased along with injured were returning in their
car, accused, ten in number stopped and wrongfully restrained and compelled them
to alight from their car and A-1 and A-3 picked up a stick of casuarina tree from the
spot and A-2 picked up a brick from the roadside - A-1 hit the deceased with a
stick on his head, whereas A-2 hit the deceased with the brick, as a result of which
the deceased fell on the ground - A-3 attacked the others with a stick and caused
them simple and grievous hurt - A-1 and A-2 caused only one injury each on the
deceased and there found not a repeat or a multiple assault by them - Role of
exhortation to kill the deceased, not proved to be assigned to A-3 - Trial court
acquitted four accused and High Court acquitted three other accused by giving
finding as to non-formation of unlawful assembly with common object and, in this
way, only the appellants i.e. A-1, A-2 and A-3, stood convicted by High Court, and
whose conviction now stands modified to that under S. 304 Pt. II
(Paras 15 to 24)
Held :
The use of the term "likely" in several places in respect of culpable homicide,
highlights the element of uncertainty that the act of the accused may or may not
have killed the person. Section 300 IPC which defines "murder", however refrains
from the use of the term likely, which reveals absence of ambiguity left on behalf of
the accused. The accused is for sure that his act will definitely cause death. It is
often difficult to distinguish between culpable homicide and murder as both involve
death. Yet, there is a subtle distinction of intention and knowledge involved in both
the crimes. This difference lies in the degree of the act. There is a very wide
variance of degree of intention and knowledge among both the crimes.
(Para 17)
In the scheme of the Penal Code, "culpable homicide" is genus and "murder" its
specie. All "murder" is "culpable homicide" but not vice versa. Speaking generally,
"culpable homicide" sans "special characteristics of murder", is "culpable homicide
not amounting to murder". For the purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to
the gravity of this generic offence, the Penal Code practically recognises three
degrees of culpable homicide. The first is, what may be called, "culpable homicide of
the first degree". This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is defined in
Section 300 as "murder". The second may be termed as "culpable homicide of the
second degree". This is punishable under the first part of Section 304. Then, there is
"culpable homicide of the third degree". This is the lowest type of culpable homicide
and the punishment provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments
provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under
the second part of Section 304.
(Para 17)
The academic distinction between "murder" and "culpable homicide not
amounting to murder" has vexed the courts for more than a century. The confusion
is caused, if courts losing sight of the true scope and meaning of the terms used by
the legislature in these sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute
abstractions. The safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of
these provisions seems to be to keep in focus the keywords used in the various
clauses of Sections 299 and 300.
(Para 17)
The court should proceed to decide the pivotal question of intention, with care
and caution, as that will decide whether the case falls under Section 302 or 304
Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or insignificant matters-plucking of a fruit, straying
of cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an objectionable
glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes culminating in deaths. Usual
motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may be totally absent in such
cases. There may be no intention. There may be no premeditation. In fact, there
may not even be criminality. At the other end of the spectrum, there may be cases
of murder where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for murder by
attempting to put forth a case that there was no intention to cause death. It is for
the courts to ensure that the cases of murder punishable under Section 302, are
not converted into offences punishable under Section 304 Part I/II, or cases of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder are treated as murder punishable under
Section 302.
(Para 17)
The intention to cause death can be gathered generally from a combination of a
few or several of the following, among other, circumstances : (i) nature of
the
weapon used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried by the accused or was picked
up from the spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv)
the amount of force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was in the
course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight; (vi) whether the
incident occurs by chance or whether there was any premeditation; (vii) whether
there was any prior enmity or whether the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether
there was any grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for such
provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of passion; (x) whether the person
inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage or has acted in a cruel and unusual
manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or several blows. The above
list of circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive and there may be several other
special circumstances with reference to individual cases which may throw light on
the question of intention.
(Para 17)
Considering the statutory provisions laid down in IPC and the law on the point,
the present case falls into the category of a culpable homicide not amounting to
murder falling under Section 304 Part II IPC for the following reasons:
(1) There was no premeditation of mind to commit murder.
(2) All the accused were admittedly not armed when they stopped the
vehicle of the deceased and his friends and compelled them to alight from the
same.
(3) It was during the verbal altercation at that stage that the three accused
picked up the weapon of assault, namely, sticks of casuarina tree and a brick
from the roadside.
(4) Single blow was given to the deceased by Accused 1 and 2.
(5) The case set up for exhortation to kill the deceased has not been found
to be proved.
(6) Both the groups consisted of young men.
(7) The High Court found that there was no unlawful assembly formed with a
common object and accordingly had acquitted three other accused and also the
present appellants from the charge of unlawful assembly under Section 149 IPC.
(8) The appellants have been convicted with the aid of Section 34 IPC.
(para 21)
Thus, for all the reasons stated above, the appellants would be entitled for
acquittal under Section 302 IPC but would be liable to be convicted under Section
304 Part II IPC. Rest of the conviction upheld by the High Court and the sentence
for the charges under Sections 341, 323, 324 and 427 read with Section 34 IPC is
maintained. It is ordered accordingly.
(Para 23)
500, followed
distinguished
SK-D/69020/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case :
N. Hariharan, Senior Advocate [P.V. Dinesh (Advocate-on-Record),
Ashwini Kr. Singh, Bineesh K., Harikumar V. (Advocate-on-Record),
Anupam Mishra, Jenis V. Francis, Ms P.S. Chandralekha, Shinoj K.
Narayanan and K. Rajeev (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the
Appellant;
Harshad V. Hameed (Advocate-on-Record), Dileep Poolakkot and Ms
Ashly Harshad, Advocates], for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Gulab V. State of U.P.
775b, 781b, 781c
Mohd. Rafiq V. State of M.P.
775g
State of Kerala
775b, 781e
Pulicherla Nagaraju V. State of A.P.
775g, 779b
A.P. V. Rayavarapu Punnayya
775g, 778c
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
VIKRAM NATH, J. - The present set of three appeals filed by the
appellant-accused, namely, Biju (Accused 1), Ashique Salam (Accused
2) and Ajmal (Accused 3) assail the correctness of the judgment and
order dated 30-5-2019 1 passed by the High Court of Kerala in Criminal
Appeals Nos. 91, 238 and 564 of 2014, whereby the aforesaid appeals
were partly allowed. The conviction of these three appellants under
Sections 143, 147, 148 IPC ("the Penal Code, 1860") read with Section
149 IPC was set aside, however, their conviction and sentence under
Sections 341, 323, 324, 427 and 302 read with Section 34 IPC as
awarded by the trial court was confirmed.
2. At the outset, it may be pointed out that there were 10 (ten)
accused, who were charge-sheeted. The present appellants are Accused
A-1, A-2 and A-3. Four accused, namely, Accused 4, 5, 7 and 10 were
acquitted of all the charges by the trial court. Further, the High Court
acquitted three accused, namely, Accused 6, 8 and 9 of all the charges.
Thus, out of 10 (ten) accused, the present three appellant-accused A-1,
A-2 and A-3 stand convicted by the High Court and, as such, are before
this Court.
3. According to the prosecution case the entire transaction was in
three parts. It is briefly stated as under:
3.1. In the last week of January 2008, there were festivals going on
in the Church located at Thidanadu and Variyanikkadu. The deceased
Varkeychen alias George Thomas along with his friends initially went to
Thidanadu Church in a Scorpio car, which was driven by Saji Joseph
(PW 1) to attend a musical festival (gana mela). The deceased along
with his friends watched the programme for about half-an-hour and,
thereafter, proceeded towards another church at Variyanikkadu to enjoy
the festival going on there. At about 9.00 p.m., they were returning to
Thidanadu Church, when two motorbikes driven
by Accused 9 (Sabeer) and Accused 3, Ajmal were moving in front of
their car and blocked their way. Accused 6 (Razique Jalal alias Razee)
was sitting as a pillion on the motorcycle, driven by A-3 (Ajmal). At
that time, a verbal altercation took place between Saji Joseph (PW 1)
and A-3 (Ajmal) regarding the bikes not giving way to their vehicle
(four wheeler).
3.2. At around 10.45 p.m., the deceased along with his friends were
returning, when their car reached the place called Veyilukanampara
Junction in Thidanadu Kara, they saw Accused 9 (Sabeer) waiting for
them by the side of the road and soon thereafter the other accused also
joined him on different bikes. All the ten accused persons formed an
unlawful assembly and in prosecution of a common object wrongfully
restrained the deceased and his friends and compelled them to alight
from their vehicle. Once they were out of the vehicle, they were
attacked by the accused-appellants. Accused 1 (Biju) hit the deceased
with a stick of casuarina tree (marked as MO 2). Whereas Accused 2
(Ashique Salam) hit on the back of his neck with a brick (marked as MO
3), as a result of these two injuries, the deceased fell on the road.
Accused 3 (Ajmal) assaulted Saji Joseph (PW 1) with a stick of
casuarina tree (marked as MO 1) causing injuries on his head and other
parts of the body. As by this time, public had started gathering, the
accused left the place of occurrence.
3.3. Further, when the deceased was being taken in the car by his
friends towards the hospital, once again, the vehicle was stopped by
the accused persons near Chennadu Junction, where Accused 3, Ajmal
threw stones at the car causing damage to the wind screen and other
glasses.
3.4. The injured deceased was taken to IHM Hospital,
Bharananganam and from there, he was referred to Medical College
Hospital at Kottayam. His condition was deteriorating, as such, he was
shifted to Medical Trust Hospital, Ernakulam, where he succumbed to
the injuries on the following day at about 4.45 a.m. The first
information report was lodged by Peter (PW 2) on his statement, which
was registered as FIR (Ext. P-1).
4. The investigation was taken over by the Circle Inspector (PW 20),
who prepared the inquest report (Ext. P-2). The dead body was sent for
post-mortem, which was conducted by Assistant Professor of Forensic
Medicine and Deputy Police Surgeon, Medical College Hospital,
Kottayam (PW 13) at about 2.05 p.m. on 28-1-2008. He prepared the
post-mortem report (Ext. P-10) mentioning the following ante-mortem
injuries:
"(1) Contusion of scalp 10 X 8 cm involving the full thickness of
left occipital region, its lower extent 3 cm, above root of neck and 2
cm outer to midline.
(2) Contusion of right cheek 5 X 4 cm X 0.5 cm
(3) Abraded contusion 8 X 1 cm-2 cm X 1 cm horizontally oblique
involving right side of neck and face, its lower outer extent 7 cm
above root of neck and 10 cm outer to midline.
The skull showed fissured fracture 8 cm long involving the
occipital bone of left side of posterior cranial fossa, 1-1.5 cm outer to
midline, corresponding to Injury 1. Dura was intact had a bluish tint
and tense,
subdural clots were seen overlying right frontal and temporal lobe of
brain with bilateral subarachnoid haemorrhage. The pons on sectioning
showed haemorrhagic area 1.5 cm X 1 cm. The right frontal pole of
brain had contusion 3 X 2 X 0.5 cm. Brain showed fattened gyri and
narrow sulci. The anterior cranial fossa a right side showed fissured
fracture 4 cm long.
(4) Contusion 5 X 4 X 0.5 cm long.
(5) Abrasion 2 X 1 cm on front of left knee."
5. After completing the investigations, the police report under
Section 173(2) CrPC ("Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973") was
submitted, whereupon, cognizance was taken by the Magistrate and the
matter committed to the Sessions Court for trial. The trial court framed
charges under Sections 143, 147, 148, 341, 323, 324, 427 and 302
read with Section 149 IPC. The charges were read over to the accused,
who pleaded not guilty and, as such, were put to trial.
6. The prosecution examined 21 witnesses as PW 1 to PW 21 and
exhibited as many as 74 documentary evidence marked as Exts. P-1 to
P-74 and further produced 19 material objects marked as MO 1 to MO
19. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused were
examined under Section 313 CrPC and the incriminating material was
put to them. They denied all such circumstances and reiterated their
innocence. The investigating officer also conducted a test identification
parade.
7. After considerina the material evidence on record and after
hearing the learned counsel for the parties, the trial court acquitted four
accused, namely, Accused 4, 5, 7 and 10, namely, Nijas, Naseebulla
alias Nazeeb, Seenaj and Shihab. It further convicted the rest of the 6
(six) Accused 1, 2, 3, 6, 8 and 9, namely, Biju, Ashique Salam, Ajmal,
Razique Jalal alias Razee, Salim Basheer alias Saly and Sabeer
respectively.
8. Aggrieved by the conviction, all the 6 (six) accused preferred
appeals before the High Court. Criminal Appeal No. 87 of 2014 was filed
by Accused 6 and 8, namely, Razique Jalal alias Razee and Salim
Basheer alias Saly, whereas Criminal Appeal No. 132 of 2014 was filed
by Accused 9 Sabeer. As already recorded above, the other three
appeals bearing Nos. 564, 238 and 91 of 2014 were filed by Accused 1,
2 and 3 respectively, namely, Biju, Ashique Salam and Ajmal. As
already recorded above, the High Court allowed Appeals Nos. 87 and
132 of 2014 acquitting the three Accused 6, 8 and 9 of all the charges,
whereas it partly allowed Appeals Nos. 564, 238 and 91 of 2014 of the
present three appellants. Aggrieved by the judgment of the High
Court, the three appellants are before this Court.
9. The prosecution has established:
9.1. That the death of deceased Varkeychen alias George Thomas
was homicidal.
9.2. That PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4 suffered simple and grievous hurt
which took place at the date, time and place stated in the FIR.
9.3. That the FIR was promptly lodged.
9.4. The ante-mortem injuries suffered by the deceased are in
consonance with the report registered by PW 2 and also established
from the statements of PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4, who are the injured
eyewitnesses.
9.5. The recovery of the material objects (MOs 1, 2 and 3) used by
the three appellants in causing the fatal injuries to the deceased as also
the injuries to PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4.
10. Insofar as the test identification parade is concerned, the same
has not been found to be very reliable by the courts below, however, as
the witnesses and the injured knew the accused, their identification in
court has been found to be sufficient by the courts below. They were all
residents of neighbourhood and knew each other.
11. We are, thus, satisfied that the occurrence in the manner as set
up by the prosecution has been duly established. The deceased died
due to the injuries caused by Accused 1 and 2 by using a stick (MO 2)
and a brick (MO 3), whereas, the injuries caused to PW 1, PW 2 and PW
4 are on account of the assault by Accused 3 by using a stick (MO 1).
The only question which requires consideration is whether it was a
culpable homicide amounting to murder punishable under Section 302
IPC as has been held by the courts below or it was a culpable homicide
not amounting to murder punishable under Section 304 IPC as
submitted by the counsel for the appellants.
12. The learned counsel for the appellants have led great emphasis
on the manner in which the incident occurred. According to them:
12.1. There was no premeditation of committing murder.
12.2. The accused, admittedly, when they accosted the vehicle and
compelled the deceased and the injured to come out of the vehicle,
were not armed with any weapons.
12.3. It was only when they alighted from the vehicle and some
heated arguments took place as a result of the earlier verbal altercation
in not giving a pass to the Scorpio vehicle to overtake the motorbikes,
that the accused-appellants picked up the stick of casuarina tree from
the decorations, which had been made at that place and also the brick
from the side of the road and assaulted with it.
12.4. Both these weapons used could not be said to be deadly
weapons but could have definitely caused grievous hurt and may be
injuries which could result into death.
12.5. It is true that the injuries noted in the post-mortem report of
the deceased were on the vital part i.e. the head and neck and which,
according to the medical evidence, was sufficient in ordinary course to
cause death, but the same was unintentional.
12.6. Only one blow each was given by Accused 1 and 2 to the
deceased. There was no repeated assault.
12.7. There was no mens rea to commit murder, therefore, the same
would fall within the exception of Section 300 IPC.
12.8. On the own findings of the High Court, it was not a case of
culpable homicide amounting to murder.
12.9. Our attention has been drawn to paras 30 and 31 of the
judgment1 of the High Court, which took into consideration the
evidence led by the eyewitnesses and injured, namely, PW 1, PW 2 and
PW 4, according to which, the charge under Section 302 ought to have
been converted to Section 304 IPC. The appellants ought to have been
acquitted under Section 302 IPC and at best could have been convicted
under Section 304 IPC.
12.10. Paras 30 and 31 of the judgment1 of the High Court are
"30. We have no dispute with the proposition that common object
may be formed at the spur of the moment, and that prior meeting of
minds or a formal assembly consisting of the members of the
unlawful assembly to commit a particular crime may not be
essential. The precedent on the point referred to earlier would
indicate that the knowledge of the members of the assembly that
the act which actually occurred was very likely to be caused by their
acts, is sufficient to make them vicariously liable for the ultimate
consequences. But, in the instant case, what we see from the
evidence is that the first part of the occurrence at Chemmalamattom
was only an altercation between PW 1 and A-3 in the presence of A-6
and A-9 with regard to the bikers not giving way and passage to the
car driven by PW 1 for overtaking. The altercation also did not last
long enough so as to form a vengeance in the mind of A-3, A-6 and
A-9 so as to garner support of the remaining accused to form an
unlawful assembly with the common object of committing murder,
particularly of the deceased, because the altercation was only with A
-3 and PW 1 and the deceased had nothing to do with the
altercation. Under the circumstances, we are of the opinion that the
accused definitely did not have a common object of murdering the
deceased. It is also relevant to note that had the accused
entertained the common object to commit murder or even previous
act, they would have been lying in wait for the Scorpio car armed
with deadly weapons. None of the prosecution witness has a case
that the accused had accosted them at the scene of occurrence
armed with deadly weapons. It is only after the witnesses alighted
from the car, PW 1 had a conversation with A-9 and Accused 1, 2
and 3 picked up the weapons which were available there and
attacked the passengers in the car, including the deceased. Even if A
-3 had called for others to kill, it could not have been the deceased
because he
only had a vengeance against PW 1, and, therefore, the entire
occurrence as appeared to us from the oral testimony of witnesses
would indicate that it is only a chance encounter without any
premeditated motive in prosecution of common object.
31. It is also pertinent to note that PW 1 had testified that he had
a very friendly conversation with A-9 in the beginning after he
alighted from the car at the scene of occurrence. It is also testified
that when the accused went to attack the passengers of the car,
including PW 1, A-9 had prevented others from causing injuries. This
particular statement in the testimony of PW 1 clearly exonerated A-9
of the allegations of having acted in prosecution of common object of
committing murder. He was not even wielding any weapon in his
hands. In fact, except A-1, A-2 and A-3, none of the other accused
had picked up any weapon from the scene of occurrence. Even A-1
and A-3 had picked up sticks, which were hanging at the scene of
occurrence as part of the decoration done in connection with the
Church festival. MO 3 brick was picked up by A-2 from the side of
the road abruptly during the scuffle that ensued in consequence of
the passengers of the car alighting. Under the circumstances, we are
of the considered opinion that apart from A-1, A-2 and A-3, none of
the other accused could be guilty for attacking the deceased, PW 1
and PW 2. The prosecution has not succeeded in establishing that
there was formation of an unlawful assembly acting in furtherance of
common object. The finding of the learned Sessions Judge roping in
all the appellants resorting to Section 149 is therefore not held good.
It is also pertinent to note that none of the accused were earlier
armed with deadly weapons and therefore it cannot be said that they
were guilty of committing riot armed with deadly weapons, an
offence punishable under Section 148 IPC."
12.11. As there was no intention to commit murder or a pre-planned
attempt to commit murder, Section 302 IPC, charge could not have
been sustained.
12.12. That the appellants are in jail and have suffered incarceration
of several years.
13. On behalf of the State of Kerala, it is submitted that the entire
transaction took place in three parts. The first incident took place when
a verbal altercation took place in overtaking the vehicles. The second
incident took place, in which the physical assault occurred causing fatal
injuries to the deceased and causing simple and grievous hurt to the
three witnesses, namely, PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4. The third incident took
place when the injured was being taken to the hospital; stones were
pelted by Accused 3 causing damage to the vehicle.
14. The learned counsel for the State further submitted that there
was clear motive to commit murder as after the first episode of verbal
altercation took place, it was only with an intention to commit murder
that all the accused joined together by forming an unlawful assembly
accosting the vehicle in which the
deceased was travelling with his friends compelling them to come out
of the vehicle and thereafter it was an open assault with sticks and
bricks, which were used with such force causing fatal injuries to the
deceased and, therefore, it was nothing short of committing a pre-
planned murder. Even after having caused the fatal injuries, the
accused further tried to prevent the deceased from being taken to the
hospital and the intention was to stop the vehicle and cause enough
delay so that the deceased, who was still alive may ultimately die. The
judgment of the High Court does not suffer from any infirmity and the
appeal, accordingly deserves to be dismissed. The learned counsel has
placed reliance upon a judgment of this Court in Gulab V. State of U.P.
2
15. Having considered the submissions and having perused the
material on record, we do not find any infirmity in the prosecution
establishing the incident as set up in the first information report. For
the said conclusion, we have taken note of the following:
15.1. First information report was promptly lodged.
15.2. The prosecution story as set up in the FIR appears to be
probable.
15.3. The medical evidence fully corroborates the prosecution story.
15.4. PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4, the three eyewitnesses have fully
supported the prosecution story and have narrated the same incident
as it occurred.
15.5. Formal witnesses have discharged their burden by proving the
police papers and other documentary evidence placed on record by the
prosecution.
15.6. The material objects recovered have also been duly proved.
15.7. According to the medical evidence, the material objects
alleged to have been used in the commission of crime could have been
actually used in causing the injuries.
16. The only question which falls for our consideration is as to
whether the manner in which the entire transaction took place in
particular relating to the physical assault, would amount to culpable
homicide amounting to murder or culpable homicide not amounting to
murder.
17. The distinctive features and the considerations relevant for
determining a culpable homicide amounting to murder and
distinguishing it from the culpable homicide not amounting to murder
has been a matter of debate in large number of cases. Instead of
referring to several decisions on the point reference is being made to a
recent decision in Mohd. Rafiq V. State of M.P.³, wherein Ravindra
Bhatt, J. speaking for the Bench, relied upon two previous judgments4
dealing with the issue as narrated in paras 11, 12 and 13 of the Report
"11. The question of whether in a given case, a homicide is
murder5, punishable under Section 302 IPC, or culpable homicide, of
either
description, punishable under Section 304 IPC has engaged the
attention of
courts in this country for over one-and-a-half century, since the
enactment of IPC; a welter of case law, on this aspect exists, including
perhaps several hundred rulings by this Court. The use of the term
"likely" in several places in respect of culpable homicide, highlights the
element of uncertainty that the act of the accused may or may not have
killed the person. Section 300 IPC which defines "murder", however
refrains from the use of the term likely, which reveals absence of
ambiguity left on behalf of the accused. The accused is for sure that his
act will definitely cause death. It is often difficult to distinguish
between culpable homicide and murder as both involve death. Yet,
there is a subtle distinction of intention and knowledge involved in both
the crimes. This difference lies in the degree of the act. There is a very
wide variance of degree of intention and knowledge among both the
crimes.
12. The decision in State of A.P. V. Rayavarapu Punnayya 6 notes
the important distinction between the two provisions, and their
differing, but subtle distinction. The Court pertinently pointed out
`12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, "culpable homicide" is
genus and "murder" its specie. All "murder" is "culpable homicide"
but not vice versa. Speaking generally, "culpable homicide" sans
"special characteristics of murder", is "culpable homicide not
amounting to murder". For the purpose of fixing punishment,
proportionate to the gravity of this generic offence, the Code
practically recognises three degrees of culpable homicide. The first
is, what may be called, "culpable homicide of the first degree". This
is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is defined in Section
300 as "murder". The second may be termed as "culpable homicide
of the second degree". This is punishable under the first part of
Section 304. Then, there is "culpable homicide of the third degree".
This is the lowest type of culpable homicide and the punishment
provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments provided
for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable
under the second part of Section 304.
13. The academic distinction between "murder" and "culpable
homicide not amounting to murder" has vexed the courts for more
than a century. The confusion is caused, if courts losing sight of the
true scope and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these
sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute abstractions. The
safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of these
provisions seems to be to keep in focus the keywords used in the
various clauses of Sections 299 and 300.
13. The considerations that should weigh with courts, in
discerning whether an act is punishable as murder, or culpable
homicide, not amounting to murder, were outlined in Pulicherla
58, para 29)
`29. Therefore, the Court should proceed to decide the pivotal
question of intention, with care and caution, as that will decide
whether the case falls under Section 302 or 304 Part I or 304 Part II.
Many petty or insignificant matters - plucking of a fruit, straying of
cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an
objectionable glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes
culminating in deaths. Usual motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or
suspicion may be totally absent in such cases. There may be no
intention. There may be no premeditation. In fact, there may not
even be criminality. At the other end of the spectrum, there may be
cases of murder where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for
murder by attempting to put forth a case that there was no intention
to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure that the cases of
murder punishable under Section 302, are not converted into
offences punishable under Section 304 Part I/II, or cases of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder are treated as murder punishable
under Section 302. The intention to cause death can be gathered
generally from a combination of a few or several of the following,
among other, circumstances : (i) nature of the weapon used; (ii)
whether the weapon was carried by the accused or was picked up
from the spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the
body; (iv) the amount of force employed in causing injury; (v)
whether the act was in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight
or free for all fight; (vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or
whether there was any premeditation; (vii) whether there was any
prior enmity or whether the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether
there was any grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for
such provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of passion; (x)
whether the person inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage
or has acted in a cruel and unusual manner; (xi) whether the
accused dealt a single blow or several blows. The above list of
circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive and there may be several
other special circumstances with reference to individual cases which
may throw light on the question of intention."
(emphasis in original)
18. For the said purpose, we examined the evidence on record as
narrated in the first information report, during investigation as per the
evidence collected by the investigating officer and also the evidence led
during the course of trial in particular by the injured eyewitnesses.
19. From the perusal of all the above material, the prosecution story
as set up and as established in brief can be summarised as under:
19.1. On the fateful evening of 27-1-2008, the first incident took
place around 9.00 p.m. regarding the overtaking of the vehicles of one
party and the other resulting into a verbal altercation at that stage
between PW 1 and A-9.
19.2. Both the parties went in separate directions after the verbal
altercation.
19.3. Later on, at about 10.45 p.m., when the deceased along with
his other friends PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4 were returning, they were
stopped by the accused, 10 (ten) in number, they were wrongfully
restrained, compelled to alight from their vehicle.
19.4. Again, a verbal altercation took place whereafter Accused 1
and 3 picked up a stick of casuarina tree from the decoration set up on
the roadside and Accused 2 picked up a brick from the roadside.
Accused 1 hit the deceased with a stick on his head, whereas Accused 2
hit the deceased with the brick, as a result of which, the deceased fell
on the ground. Accused 3 attacked the others with a stick and caused
them simple and grievous hurt.
19.5. Accused 1 and 2 had caused only one injury each on the
deceased. It was not a repeat or a multiple assault by them.
19.6. Although, role of exhortation to kill the deceased was assigned
to Accused 3, but during trial and in the cross-examination, all the
three witnesses PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4 stated that they were not sure
whether they have said so in their statements under Section 161 CrPC.
Thus, apparently, there was no role assigned to exhortation to any of
the accused to kill the deceased.
20. The trial court had acquitted 4 (four) accused, namely, Accused
4, 5, 7 and 10 and the High Court acquitted three other accused,
namely, Accused 6, 8 and 9 of all the charges.
21. Considering the statutory provisions laid down in IPC and the
law on the point, we find that the present case falls into the category of
a culpable homicide not amounting to murder falling under Section 304
Part II IPC for the following reasons:
21.1. There was no premeditation of mind to commit murder.
21.2. All the accused were admittedly not armed when they stopped
the vehicle of the deceased and his friends and compelled them to
alight from the same.
21.3. It was during the verbal altercation at that stage that the
three accused picked up the weapon of assault, namely, sticks of
casuarina tree and a brick from the roadside.
21.4. Single blow was given to the deceased by Accused 1 and 2.
21.5. The case set up for exhortation to kill the deceased has not
been found to be proved.
21.6. Both the groups consisted of young men.
21.7. The High Court found that there was no unlawful assembly
formed with a common object and accordingly had acquitted three
other accused and also the present appellants from the charge of
unlawful assembly under Section 149 IPC.
21.8. The appellants have been convicted with the aid of Section 34
IPC.
22. The reference to the judgment in Gulab2 by the learned counsel
for the State of Kerala, in our opinion, is of no relevance to the facts
and circumstances of the present case. There was no issue involved
relating to the distinction between culpable homicide amounting to
murder or not amounting to murder. The issue involved in Gulab was
relating to the applicability of Section 34 IPC.
23. Thus, for all the reasons stated above, we are of the view that
the appellants would be entitled for acquittal under Section 302 IPC but
would be liable to be convicted under Section 304 Part II IPC. Rest of
the conviction upheld by the High Court and the sentence for the
charges under Sections 341, 323, 324 and 427 read with Section 34
IPC is maintained. It is ordered accordingly.
24. Now coming to the question of sentence upon conviction under
Section 304 Part II IPC, we find that all the three appellants are in jail
and have undergone several years of incarceration. We accordingly
award the sentence for the period already undergone by all the three
appellants. The appellants would be released forthwith unless they are
required in any other case.
25. The appeals stand partly allowed as above. The impugned
judgment1 of the High Court stands modified to the aforesaid extent.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Ajmal V. State of Kerala (Kerala High Court, Criminal
Appeal No. 91 of 2014, dt. 30-5-2019) sub nom Razique Jalal V. State of Kerala, (Kerala High
[Modified]
#
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Ashique Salam V. State of Kerala (Kerala High Court,
Criminal Appeal No. 238 of 2014, dt. 30-5-2019) sub nom Razique Jalal V. State of Kerala
23814 [Modified]
++ Arising from the Judgment and Order in Biju V. State of Kerala (Kerala High Court, Criminal
Appeal No. 564 of 2014, dt. 30-5-2019) sub nom Razique Jalal V. State of Kerala (Kerala High
[Modified]
1
3
4
5
Per S. Ravindra Bhat, J.-"Sections 299 and 300 IPC define the two offences. They are
extracted below:
299. Culpable homicide.-Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of
causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of
culpable homicide.
Illustrations
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with
the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z believing the ground to be
firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable
homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it A, intending to cause, or knowing
it to be likely to cause Z's death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z.
Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable
homicide.
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B who is behind a bush; A
not knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was
not guilty of culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause death by
doing an act that he knew was likely to cause death.
Explanation 1.-A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring under a
disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be
deemed to have caused his death.
Explanation 2. - Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily
injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies
and skilful treatment the death might have been prevented.
Explanation 3.-The causing of the death of child in the mother's womb is not homicide. But it
may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child
has been brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been completely born.
300. Murder.-Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the
act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or-
Secondly it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows
to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or-
Thirdly.-If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily
injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
or-
Fourthly. - If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it
must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and
commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid.
Illustrations
*
*
*
Exception 1.-When culpable homicide is not murder.-Culpable - homicide is not murder if
the offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation,
causes the death of the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other
person by mistake or accident.
The above exception is subject to the following provisos:
First.-That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an
excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.
Secondly.-That the provocation is not given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by
a public servant in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant.
Thirdly.- - That the provocation is not given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the
right of private defence.
Explanation.-Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence
from amounting to murder is a question of fact.
Illustrations
*
*
*
Exception 2.-Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, in the exercise in good faith of
the right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law
and causes the death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence
without premeditation, and without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for
the purpose of such defence.
Illustrations
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A draws out
a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other means
prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed murder, but
only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.-Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant or
aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers
given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to
be lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duty as such public servant and without
ill-will towards the person whose death is caused.
Exception 3.-Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a
sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender having
taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Explanation.- - It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or commits the
first assault.
Exception 5.-Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused,
being above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own
consent.
Illustration
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes, Z, a person under eighteen years of age to commit
suicide. Here, on account of Z's youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his own death;
A has therefore abetted murder."
6
7