In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE INDIRA BANERJEE AND HRISHIKESH ROY, JJ.)
U.N. KRISHNAMURTHY (SINCE DECEASED) THROUGH
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
Appellant;
Versus
A.M. KRISHNAMURTHY
Respondent.
Civil Appeal No. 4703 of 2022 , decided on July 12, 2022
A. Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963 - S. 16(c) -
Averment and proof of readiness and willingness to perform an obligation to
pay money - Requirements of - Summarised - No evidence produced by
plaintiff to show continuous "readiness and willingness" to pay the
consideration money in agreement to sell, which respondent-plaintiff was
required to prove, regardless of any default by original defendant - Held,
plaintiff not entitled to relief of specific performance
- To aver and prove readiness and willingness to perform an obligation to pay
money, in terms of a contract, plaintiff would have to make specific statements in
plaint and adduce evidence to show availability of funds to make payment in terms
of contract in time - In other words, plaintiff would have to plead that plaintiff had
sufficient funds or was in a position to raise funds in time to discharge his obligation
under contract - If plaintiff does not have sufficient funds with him to discharge his
obligations in terms of a contract, which requires payment of money, plaintiff would
have to specifically plead how funds would be available to him
- In present case respondent-plaintiff failed to discharge his duty to prove his
readiness as well as willingness to perform his part of contract, by adducing cogent
evidence - Acceptable evidence has not been placed on record to prove his
readiness and willingness - Further, it is clear from respondent-plaintiff's balance
sheet that he did not have sufficient funds to discharge his part of contract -
Making subsequent deposit of balance consideration after lapse of seven years
would not establish respondent-plaintiff's readiness to discharge his part of contract
- Plaintiff had only paid an insignificant amount of Rs 10,001 as advance when
consideration was Rs 15,10,000 - Having paid an insignificant amount plaintiff was
not entitled to discretionary equitable relief of specific performance
B. Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963 - Ss. 16(c) and
20 - Specific performance of agreement to sell - Readiness and willingness
- Fact that suit had been filed after three years, just before expiry of
period of limitation - Held, can be considered as a ground to decline
respondent-plaintiff equitable relief of specific performance for purchase of
immovable property
C. Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963 - Ss. 10, 16(c)
and 20 - Specific performance of agreement to sell immovable property -
Requirements of - Summarised
- Held, court is required to pose unto itself following questions - Firstly,
whether there is a valid agreement to sell binding on both vendor and vendee -
Secondly, whether plaintiff has all along been and still is ready and willing to perform
his part of contract as envisaged under S. 16(c) - Even in a first appeal, first
appellate court is duty-bound to examine whether there was continuous readiness
and willingness on part of plaintiff to perform contract - There is a distinction
between readiness and willingness to perform contract and both ingredients are
necessary for relief of specific performance - Further, court is obliged to take
judicial notice of phenomenal rise in price of real estate in area where property is to
be sold
Held :
Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 bars the relief of specific
performance of a contract in favour of a person, who fails to aver and prove his
readiness and willingness to perform his part of contract. In view of Explanation (i)
to clause (c) of Section 16, it may not be essential for the plaintiff to actually tender
money to the defendant or to deposit money in court, except when so directed by
the Court, to prove readiness and willingness to perform the essential terms of a
contract, which involves payment of money. However, Explanation (ii) to Section
16(c) of the 1963 Act says that the plaintiff must aver performance or readiness
and willingness to perform the contract according to its true construction.
(Para 23)
To aver and prove readiness and willingness to perform an obligation to pay
money, in terms of a contract, the plaintiff would have to make specific statements
in the plaint and adduce evidence to show availability of funds to make payment in
terms of the contract in time. In other words, the plaintiff would have to plead that
the plaintiff had sufficient funds or was in a position to raise funds in time to
discharge his obligation under the contract. If the plaintiff does not have sufficient
funds with him to discharge his obligations in terms of a contract, which requires
payment of money, the plaintiff would have to specifically plead how the funds
would be available to him.
(Para 24)
In present case, of course, there is an averment in the plaint that the
respondent-plaintiff was all along ready and willing to perform his obligations under
the contract. The question is whether the respondent-plaintiff had proved his
readiness and willingness to perform his obligations under the contract.
(Paras 25 to 27)
In a suit for specific performance of a contract, the court is required to pose
unto itself the following questions, namely : (1) Whether there is a valid agreement
of sale binding on both the vendor and the vendee; (2) Whether the plaintiff has all
along been and still is ready and willing to perform his part of the contract as
envisaged under Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 19
(Paras 28 to 32)
There is a distinction between readiness and willingness to perform the contract
and both ingredients are necessary for the relief of specific performance. While
readiness means the capacity of the plaintiff to perform the contract which would
include his financial position, willingness relates to the conduct of the plaintiff.
(Para 33)
Even in a first appeal, the first appellate court is duty-bound to examine whether
there was continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff to
perform the contract.
(Paras 34 to 36)
(1851) 17 QB 127 : 117 ER 1229, followed
The Court is obliged to take judicial notice of the phenomenal rise in the price of
real estate in the area where property is to be sold.
(Para 37)
The plaintiff had only paid an insignificant amount of Rs 10,001 as advance when
the consideration was Rs 15,10,000. Having paid an insignificant amount the
plaintiff was not entitled to discretionary equitable relief of specific performance.
(Para 38)
The fact that the suit had been filed after three years, just before expiry of the
period of limitation, was also a ground to decline the respondent-plaintiff the
equitable relief of specific performance for purchase of immovable property.
&
(Para 39)
It is settled law that for relief of specific performance, the plaintiff has to prove
that all along and till the final decision of the suit, he was ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract. It is the bounden duty of the plaintiff to prove his
readiness and willingness by adducing evidence. This crucial facet has to be
determined by considering all circumstances including availability of funds and mere
statement or averment in plaint of readiness and willingness, would not suffice.
(Paras 40 to 45)
In present case, the respondent-plaintiff has failed to discharge his duty to prove
his readiness as well as willingness to perform his part of the contract, by adducing
cogent evidence. Acceptable evidence has not been placed on record to prove his
readiness and willingness. Further, it is clear from the respondent-plaintiff's balance
sheet that he did not have sufficient funds to discharge his part of contract in March
2003. Making subsequent deposit of balance consideration after lapse of seven
years would not establish the respondent-plaintiff's readiness to discharge his part
of contract.
(Para 46)
It is, therefore, patently clear that the respondent-plaintiff has failed to prove his
readiness to perform his part of contract from the date of execution of the
agreement till date of decree, which is a condition precedent for grant of relief of
specific performance. The respondent-plaintiff was not entitled to the relief of
specific performance.
(Paras 47 and 49)
followed
RM-D/69018/SV
Advocates who appeared in this case :
Krishnan Venugopal, Senior Advocate [Mahesh Thakur (Advocate-on-
Record), Ajay Kanojiya and Ms Vipasha Singh, Advocates], for the
Appellant;
N.D.B Raju, M.A. Chinnasamy (Advocate-on-Record), Ms C.
Rubavathi, C. Raghavendren, M. Veera Raghavan, V. Senthil Kumar and
Bhee Singh Dabla, Advocates, for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
792a, 792a-b, 792b-c
Malluru Mallappa V. Kuruvathappa
786f
Ram V. Charanjit Singh
790e
Kalawati V. Rakesh Kumar
786d-e
779c, 781c-d, 781d-e,
V. A.M. Krishnamurthy (reversed)
792c-d
Narayana Gowda V. Shanthamma
787b
Saradamani Kandappan V. S. Rajalakshmi
788b-c, 789a, 790b
Kaur V. Hartar Singh Sangha
784a
Sultana V. B. Rajamani
789a, 789f-g
786e-f, 787e
Basith
787b
Chavan
785d-e, 791d-e
Tammanasa
789a
787b
Purushottam Tiwari
787b
786e-f
786a, 788a, 789a
Dassji V. Sita Ram Thapar
786c-d
Sunanda Roy
788g-h
Mohan Rao
785a, 785b, 785c
789d
Works V. Rangaswamy Chettiar
787b-c
Housing Co. Construction (P) Ltd.
784e, 784g
Sassoon
784f-g, 786e-f
25. (1851) 17 QB 127 : 117 ER 1229, Cort V.
Ambergate, Nottingham, Boston & Eastern
Junction Rly. Co.
787f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
INDIRA BANERJEE, J. - Leave granted. Heard Mr Krishnan Venugopal,
learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr Mahesh Thakur, AOR on
behalf of the appellants and Mr N.D.B Raju, learned advocate appearing
with Mr M.A. Chinnasamy, AOR on behalf of the respondent.
2. This appeal is against a final judgment and decree dated 30-10-
20171 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras, dismissing the
appeal Suit No. 262 of 2011 filed by the appellants and confirming a
judgment and order and decree dated 30-11-2010 passed by the
Principal District Judge, Krishnagiri (hereinafter referred to as "the trial
court"), in Original Suit No. 30 of 2005 filed by the respondent-plaintiff,
for specific performance of an agreement for sale of the suit property.
3. In the plaint, it is pleaded that the original defendant U.N.
Krishnamurthy's father, U.R. Narasaiah had executed a will on or about
9-5-1984, bequeathing the suit property to the original defendant, U.N.
Krishnamurthy (since deceased). After the death of his father, U.R.
Narasaiah, on 25-4-1987, the original defendant U.N. Krishnamurthy
became the absolute owner of the suit property.
4. It is the case of the appellants that on 11-11-2002, while the
original defendant was getting the suit property whitewashed, a real
estate agent Mr N. Anjappa approached the original defendant with an
offer to arrange the sale of the suit property at a good price.
5. As per the pleadings in the plaint, the original defendant agreed
to sell the suit property to the respondent-plaintiff, in the presence of
Mr N. Anjappa, Mr S.A. Muralidharan and Mr M. Murali Reddy. The terms
and conditions of the agreement for sale of the suit property were
recorded by the original defendant U.N. Krishnamurthy in his own
handwriting in a letter dated 11-11-2002 given by the original
defendant to the respondent-plaintiff.
6. It is the case of the respondent-plaintiff that the original
defendant agreed to sell the suit property to the respondent-plaintiff for
a consideration of Rs 15,10,000, out of which sum of Rs 10,001 was
paid by the respondent-plaintiff to the original defendant in advance. It
was further agreed between the parties, that the respondent-plaintiff
would get the sale deed registered on or before 15-3-2003, upon
payment of the full sale consideration. The agreement was allegedly
witnessed by the real estate agent, Mr N. Anjappa.
7. According to the respondent-plaintiff, the respondent-plaintiff
approached the original defendant with the balance consideration
several times and requested the original defendant to execute the sale
deed in his favour, but the original defendant kept postponing
execution of the sale deed on one pretext or the other.
8. On or about 13-2-2003, the respondent-plaintiff issued a legal
notice to the original defendant through his lawyer stating that the
respondent-plaintiff is ever ready and willing to perform his part of the
contract and called upon the original defendant to execute the sale
deed in favour of the respondent-plaintiff after receiving the balance
consideration. By a letter dated 10-3-2003 sent in response to the
aforesaid legal notice, the original defendant denied having entered into
any oral sale agreement for sale of the suit property.
9. On 8-10-2005, the respondent-plaintiff allegedly approached the
original defendant with a request to receive the balance consideration
and to execute the sale deed in favour of the respondent-plaintiff. It is
alleged that the original defendant went back upon his promise and
refused to accede to the request made by the respondent-plaintiff.
10. In the circumstances, on or about 17-10-2005, the respondent-
plaintiff filed the suit. The original defendant filed a written statement
denying the allegations in the plaint. In the written statement, the
original defendant denied the execution of any agreement for sale of
the suit property for consideration of Rs 15,10,000 as alleged.
11. The original defendant has categorically stated that he did not
agree to sell the suit property to the respondent-plaintiff as alleged and
that he did not receive any advance on 11-11-2002 as alleged or on
any other date. It is the case of the appellants that there was no
concluded contract to sell the suit property. In the written statement it
is also pleaded that in any case, the respondent-plaintiff was never
ready or willing to perform his part of the contract.
12. The trial court framed the following issues:
"1. Whether the oral agreement of sale in the 1st week of
November, 2002 is true?
2. Whether the alleged confirmation letter dated 11-11-2002 is
true and valid?
3. Whether there is no concluded contract between the plaintiff
and the defendant is true?
4.
Whether the plaintiff always ready and willing to perform his
part of contract?
5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get the relief of specific
performance and possession?
6. To what relief the plaintiff is entitled to?"
13. The respondent-plaintiff examined three witnesses and the
original defendant deposed as witness on his own behalf. By a
judgment and order dated 30-11-2010, the trial court decreed the suit
and directed the original defendant to receive the balance sale
consideration of Rs 15 lakhs and execute the sale deed in favour of the
respondent-plaintiff.
14. All the issues framed by the trial court were answered in favour
of the respondent-plaintiff. The trial court found that the respondent-
plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract, and
thus entitled to the relief of specific performance. The relevant part of
the judgment of the trial court is set out hereinbelow:
"21. But I already discussed that the plaintiff is a businessman
and he is having sufficient means to pay the amount to the
defendant Rs 15,00,000 also deposited into court. The amount has
not shown in Exts. A-4 to A-6 is not the ground for denying the
prayer. The plaintiff is also ready and willing to perform his contract
and in view of the above discussions, the plaintiff is entitled the
relief of specific performance and possession of schedule property.
Accordingly, I answered Issues 4 and 5."
15. By the impugned judgment and order dated 30-10-2017-, the
High Court upheld the judgment and decree passed by the trial court,
holding that the respondent-plaintiff had always been ready and wiling
to perform his part of the contract. The relevant part of the impugned
Mad paras 19 & 21)
"19. The letter dated 11-11-2002 has been marked as Ext. A-1.
In Ext. A-1 period has been fixed for execution of a registered sale
deed. The consistent case of the plaintiff is that despite of repeated
demands, the defendant has not come forward to execute a sale
deed in favour of the plaintiff and therefore, a legal notice has been
issued. Ext. A-2 is a copy of the legal notice dated 13-2-2003 and
the same has also been received by the defendant. After receipt of
the same, he has given a false reply notice dated 10-3-2003. Since
on the side of the plaintiff, necessary documentary and oral evidence
have been let in, it is easily discernible that the plaintiff has always
been ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. Therefore,
the fourth contention put forth on the side of the
appellants/defendant[s] also goes out without merit.
*
*
*
21. It has already been discussed in detail that the suit property
is the absolute property of the defendant. From the evidence given
by the defendant [DW 1], the Court can very well come to a
conclusion that the entire transaction is based upon an oral sale
agreement emerged between the plaintiff and defendant. Further,
the plaintiff has shown his readiness and willingness to perform his
part of the contract. Therefore, viewing
from any angle, the contentions put forth on the side of the
appellants/defendants[s) cannot be accepted."
16. Mr Krishnan Venugopal, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellants argued that both the trial court and the High
Court committed an error on facts and also in law. According to him the
issue relating to "readiness and willingness" on the part of the
respondent-plaintiff, had not been properly appreciated by the courts
below. Emphasising on Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963,
Mr Venugopal submitted that the respondent-plaintiff had not adduced
any evidence to demonstrate continuous "readiness and willingness"
which the respondent-plaintiff was required to prove, regardless of any
default by the original defendant. Mr Venugopal also argued that the
Court should also take judicial notice of the steep rise in the price of
real estate, before granting the discretionary relief of specific
performance.
17. Mr N.D.B. Raju appearing on behalf of the respondent-plaintiff
submitted that the issues framed by the trial court of whether there
was a concluded contract between the plaintiff and the defendant, and
whether the plaintiff was always ready and willing to perform his part of
the contract were factual issues determinable on evidence.
18. Mr Raju argued that this Court should not disturb the concurrent
factual findings of the trial court and the High Court of readiness and
willingness of the respondent-plaintiff to perform his part of the
contract.
19. Mr Raju has emphatically argued that the respondent-plaintiff
was ever ready and willing to perform his part of the contract and that
the original defendant had been delaying the execution of the sale
deed. To prove readiness and willingness of the respondent-plaintiff, Mr
Raju referred to the testimony of the plaintiff's witnesses, N. Anjappa
(PW 2) and S.A. Muralidharan (PW 3) who have stated that the
respondent-plaintiff had on multiple occasions, before the cut-off date
of 15-3-2003 approached the original defendant for execution of the
sale deed, but the original defendant delayed the execution of the sale
deed.
20. It is well settled that, in a suit for specific performance of an
agreement, it is for the plaintiff to prove his readiness and willingness
to perform his obligations under the agreement. Where a certain
amount has been paid in advance and the balance is required to be
paid within a stipulated time, it is for the plaintiff to show that he was
in a position to pay the balance money. The plaintiff has to prove that
he has the money or has alternatively made necessary arrangements to
get the money. In this case, the appellant-original defendant have all
along contended that the plaintiff respondent neither offered to pay nor
was in a position to pay the balance consideration of Rs 15,00,000.
21. The primary question for determination is whether the
respondent-plaintiff has proved his readiness and willingness to
perform his part of the contract or not?
22. Section 16 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, as it stood at the
material time (prior to amendment with effect from 1-10-2018), inter
alia, provides:
"16. Personal bars to relief.-Specific performance of a contract
cannot be enforced in favour of a person-
(a) who would not be entitled to recover compensation for its
breach; or
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates any
essential term of, the contract that on his part remains to be
performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or wilfully acts at
variance with, or in subversion of, the relation intended to be
established by the contract; or
(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed or has
always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of
the contract which are to be performed by him, other than terms
the performance of which has been prevented or waived by the
defendant.
Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (c),
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money, it is not
essential for the plaintiff to actually tender to the defendant or to
deposit in court any money except when so directed by the court;
(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readiness and
willingness to perform, the contract according to its true
construction."
23. Section 16 (c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 bars the relief of
specific performance of a contract in favour of a person, who fails to
aver and prove his readiness and willingness to perform his part of
contract. In view of Explanation (i) to clause (c) of Section 16, it may
not be essential for the plaintiff to actually tender money to the
defendant or to deposit money in court, except when so directed by the
Court, to prove readiness and willingness to perform the essential
terms of a contract, which involves payment of money. However,
Explanation (ii) says the plaintiff must aver performance or readiness
and willingness to perform the contract according to its true
construction.
24. To aver and prove readiness and willingness to perform an
obligation to pay money, in terms of a contract, the plaintiff would have
to make specific statements in the plaint and adduce evidence to show
availability of funds to make payment in terms of the contract in time.
In other words, the plaintiff would have to plead that the plaintiff had
sufficient funds or was in a position to raise funds in time to discharge
his obligation under the contract. If the plaintiff does not have
sufficient funds with him to discharge his obligations in terms of a
contract, which requires payment of money, the plaintiff would have to
specifically plead how the funds would be available to him. To cite an
example, the plaintiff may aver and prove, by adducing evidence, an
arrangement with a financier for disbursement of adequate funds for
timely compliance with the terms and conditions of a contract involving
payment of money.
25. In Man Kaur V. Hartar Singh Sangha², this Court held that :
"40.
A person who fails to aver and prove that he has performed
or has always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms
of the contract which are to be performed by him (other than the
terms the performance of which has been prevented or waived by
the defendant) is barred from claiming specific performance.
Therefore, even assuming that the defendant had committed breach,
if the plaintiff fails to aver in the plaint or prove that he was always
ready and willing to perform the essential terms of contract which
are required to be performed by him (other than the terms the
performance of which has been prevented or waived by the plaintiff),
there is a bar to specific performance in his favour. Therefore, the
assumption of the respondent that readiness and willingness on the
part of the plaintiff is something which need not be proved, if the
plaintiff is able to establish that the defendant refused to execute
the sale deed and thereby committed breach, is not correct. Let us
give an example. Take a case where there is a contract for sale for a
consideration of Rs 10 lakhs and earnest money of Rs 1 lakh was
paid and the vendor wrongly refuses to execute the sale deed unless
the purchaser is ready to pay Rs 15 lakhs. In such a case there is a
clear breach by the defendant. But in that case, if the plaintiff did
not have the balance Rs 9 lakhs (and the money required for stamp
duty and registration) or the capacity to arrange and pay such
money, when the contract had to be performed, the plaintiff will not
be entitled to specific performance, even if he proves breach by the
defendant, as he was not "ready and willing" to perform his
obligations."
26. In Prem Raj V. DLF Housing Co. Construction (P) Ltd. 3 cited by
Mr Venugopal, this Court speaking through Ramaswamy, J. held that :
(AIR p. 1357, para 5)
"5. It is well settled that in a suit for specific performance the
plaintiff should allege that he is ready and willing to perform his part
of the contract
"
and if the fact is traversed, he is required to prove a continuous
readiness and willingness from the date of the contract to the time of
the hearing, to perform the contract on his part. For such conclusion
the learned Judge relied upon the opinion of Lord Blanesburgh, in
Ardeshir Mama V. Flora Sassoon4.
27. In DLF Housing Co. Construction (P) Ltd. 3 in the absence of an
averment on the part of the plaintiff in the plaint, that he was ready
and willing to perform his part of the contract, it was held that the
plaintiff had no cause of action so far as the relief for specific
performance was concerned. In this case, of course, there is an
averment in the plaint that the respondent-plaintiff was all along ready
and willing to perform his obligations under the contract.
The question is whether the respondent-plaintiff had proved his
readiness and willingness to perform his obligations under the contract.
28. In N.P. Thirugnanam V. R. Jagan Mohan Rao5 this Court
reiterated that Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 envisages
that the plaintiff must plead and prove that he had performed or has
always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of the
contract which were to be performed by him other than those terms,
the performance of which has been prevented or waived by the
defendant. In N.P. Thirugnanam5 this Court said that the continuous
readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff was a condition
precedent for grant of the relief of specific performance.
29. This Court, in effect, held that for determining whether the
plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement it is
necessary for the Court to consider the conduct of the plaintiff prior and
subsequent to filing the suit for specific performance. The relevant part
of the judgment is extracted hereinbelow : (N.P. Thirugnanam case5,
"5.
Section 16(c) of the Act envisages that plaintiff must plead
and prove that he had performed or has always been ready and
willing to perform the essential terms of the contract which are to be
performed by him, other than those terms the performance of which
has been prevented or waived by the defendant. The continuous
readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a condition
precedent to grant the relief of specific performance. This
circumstance is material and relevant and is required to be
considered by the court while granting or refusing to grant the
relief."
30. In Umabai V. Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan6, this Court held that a
finding as to whether the plaintiffs were all along and still ready and
willing to perform their part of the contract, was a mandatory
requirement under Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act. The Court
would necessarily have to arrive at the finding that the plaintiff all
along were, and still are ready and also willing to perform their part of
the contract, taking into account the entirety of the pleadings as also
38)
"38.
'5.
So far these being a plea that they were ready and
willing to perform their part of the contract is there in the pleading,
we have no hesitation to conclude, that this by itself is not sufficient
to hold that the appellants were ready and willing in terms of Section
16(c) of the Specific Relief Act. This requires not only such plea but
also proof of the same. Now examining the first of the two
circumstances, how could mere filing of this suit, after exemption
was granted be a circumstance about willingness or readiness of the
plaintiff. This at the most could be the desire of the plaintiff to have
this property. It may be for such a desire this suit was filed raising
such a plea. But Section 16(c) of the said Act makes it clear that mere
plea is not sufficient, it has to be proved.
(emphasis supplied)
31. In K.S. Vidyanadam V. Vairavan-Superscript(2), B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. said that
grant of the relief of specific performance is discretionary and the Court
is not bound to grant it. This Court further held that though time is not
of essence to a contract relating to transfer of property, such contracts
need to be completed within a reasonable time period. Thus, the time
element cannot be completely ignored.
32. In a suit for specific performance of a contract, the Court is
required to pose unto itself the following questions, namely:
32.1. Whether there is a valid agreement of sale binding on both the
vendor and the vendee.
32.2. Whether the plaintiff has all along been and still is ready and
willing to perform his part of the contract as envisaged under Section
16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 19
33. There is a distinction between readiness and willingness to
perform the contract and both ingredients are necessary for the relief of
specific performance. In Acharya Swami Ganesh Dassji V. Sita Ram
Thapar cited by Mr Venugopal, this Court said that there was a
difference between readiness and willingness to perform a contract.
While readiness means the capacity of the plaintiff to perform the
contract which would include his financial position, willingness relates
to the conduct of the plaintiff. The same view was taken by this Court
in Kalawati V. Rakesh Kumar2.
34. Even in a first appeal, the first appellate court is duty-bound to
examine whether there was continuous readiness and willingness on
the part of the plaintiff to perform the contract. This proposition finds
support from Balraj Taneja V. Sunil Madan10 and H.P. Pyarejan V.
Dasappa¹ where this Court approved the views taken by the Privy
Council in Ardeshir Mama V. Flora Sassoon4.
35. In Malluru Mallappa V. Kuruvathappa¹², this Court observed and
"13. It is a settled position of law that an appeal is a continuation
of the proceedings of the original court. Ordinarily, the appellate
jurisdiction involves a rehearing on law as well as on fact and is
invoked by an aggrieved person. The first appeal is a valuable right
of the appellant and
therein all questions of fact and law decided by the trial court are open
for reconsideration. Therefore, the first appellate court is required to
address itself to all the issues and decide the case by giving reasons.
The court of first appeal must record its findings only after dealing with
all issues of law as well as fact and with the evidence, oral as well as
documentary, led by the parties. The judgment of the first appellate
court must display conscious application of mind and record findings
supported by reasons on all issues and contentions (see : Santosh
Hazari V. Purushottam Tiwari13, Madhukar V. Sangram ¹4, B.M. Narayana
Gowda V. Shanthamma¹5, H.K.N. Swami V. Irshad Basith16 and Sri Raja
Lakshmi Dyeing Works V. Rangaswamy Chettiar17).
14. A first appeal under Section 96 CPC is entirely different from a
second appeal under Section 100. Section 100 expressly bars second
appeal unless a question of law is involved in a case and the
question of law so involved is substantial in nature.
*
*
*
18. It is clear from the above provisions and the decisions of this
Court that the judgment of the first appellate court has to set out
points for determination, record the decision thereon and give its
own reasons. Even when the first appellate court affirms the
judgment of the trial court, it is required to comply with the
requirement of Order 41 Rule 31 and non-observance of this
requirement leads to infirmity in the judgment of the first appellate
court. No doubt, when the appellate court agrees with the views of
the trial court on evidence, it need not restate effect of evidence or
reiterate reasons given by the trial court. Expression of a general
agreement with the reasons given by the trial court would ordinarily
suffice."
36. In H.P. Pyarejan V. Dasappa¹1, Arijit Pasayat, J. speaking for this
Court reversed the judgment of the High Court holding that the High
Court did not provide reasoning for its conclusion that the plaintiff was
ready and willing to perform his part of contract. To arrive at such
conclusion the Court had relied upon Cort V. Ambergate, Nottingham,
Boston & Eastern Junction Rly. Co. 18 where Lord Campbell observed
that in common sense, the meaning of such an averment of readiness
and willingness must be that the non-completion of contract was not
the fault of the plaintiff.
37. In this case, we cannot overlook the fact that the suit property is
located in the industrial town of Hosur located about 30/40 km from
Bengaluru. The Court is obliged to take judicial notice of the
phenomenal rise in the price of real
estate in Hosur. The proposition finds support from case in K.S.
Vidyanadam V. Vairavan-Superscript(2). To quote this Court
"11.
We cannot be oblivious to the reality - and the reality is
constant and continuous rise in the values of urban properties-
fuelled by large-scale migration of people from rural areas to urban
38. Mr Venugopal argued that the plaintiff had only paid an
insignificant amount of Rs 10,001 as advance when the consideration
was Rs 15,10,000. Having paid an insignificant amount the plaintiff was
not entitled to discretionary equitable relief of specific performance, as
observed by this Court in Saradamani Kandappan V. S. Rajalakshmi19
The relevant paragraph of the judgment of this Court is set out
"37. The reality arising from this economic change cannot
continue to be ignored in deciding cases relating to specific
performance. The steep increase in prices is a circumstance which
makes it inequitable to grant the relief of specific performance where
the purchaser does not take steps to complete the sale within the
agreed period, and the vendor has not been responsible for any
delay or non-performance. A purchaser can no longer take shelter
under the principle that time is not of essence in performance of
contracts relating to immovable property, to cover his delays, laches,
breaches and "non-readiness". The precedents from an era, when
high inflation was unknown, holding that time is not of the essence
of the contract in regard to immovable properties, may no longer
apply, not because the principle laid down therein is unsound or
erroneous, but the circumstances that existed when the said
principle was evolved, no longer exist. In these days of galloping
increases in prices of immovable properties, to hold that a vendor
who took an earnest money of say about 10% of the sale price and
agreed for three months or four months as the period for
performance, did not intend that time should be the essence, will be
a cruel joke on him, and will result in injustice. Adding to the misery
is the delay in disposal of cases relating to specific performance, as
suits and appeals therefrom routinely take two to three decades to
attain finality. As a result, an owner agreeing to sell a property for
rupees one lakh and receiving rupees ten thousand as advance may
be required to execute a sale deed a quarter century later by
receiving the remaining rupees ninety thousand, when the property
value has risen to a crore of rupees."
39. As argued by Mr Venugopal, the fact that the suit had been filed
after three years, just before expiry of the period of limitation, was also
a ground to decline the respondent-plaintiff the equitable relief of
specific performance for purchase of immovable property. Mr
Venugopal's argument finds support from the judgments of this Court
in P.R. Deb & Associates V. Sunanda Roy20;
K.S. Vidyanadam V. Vairavan-; Manjunath Anandappa V. Tammanasa ²1
Azhar Sultana V. B. Rajamani Saradamani Kandappan V. S.
Rajalakshmi
para 10)
"10. It has been consistently held by the courts in India, following
certain early English decisions, that in the case of agreement of sale
relating to immovable property, time is not of the essence of the
contract unless specifically provided to that effect. The period of
limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act for filing a suit is three
years. From these two circumstances, it does not follow that any and
every suit for specific performance of the agreement (which does not
provide specifically that time is of the essence of the contract)
should be decreed provided it is filed within the period of limitation
notwithstanding the time-limits stipulated in the agreement for
doing one or the other thing by one or the other party. That would
amount to saying that the time-limits prescribed by the parties in
the agreement have no significance or value and that they mean
nothing. Would it be reasonable to say that because time is not
made the essence of the contract, the time-limit(s) specified in the
agreement have no relevance and can be ignored with impunity? It
would also mean denying the discretion vested in the court by both
Sections 10 and 20. As held by a Constitution Bench of this Court in
25.
it is clear that in the case of sale of immovable property
there is no presumption as to time being the essence of the
contract. Even if it is not of the essence of the contract the Court
may infer that it is to be performed in a reasonable time if the
conditions are (evident?):
(1) from the express terms of the contract;
(2) from the nature of the property; and
(3) from the surrounding circumstances, for example : the
object of making the contract.'
In other words, the court should look at all the relevant circumstances including the
time-limit(s) specified in the agreement and determine whether its discretion to
grant specific performance should be exercised."
36, paras 28 & 35)
"28.
The court, keeping in view the fact that it exercises a
discretionary jurisdiction, would be entitled to take into consideration
as to whether the suit had been filed within a reasonable time. What
would be a
reasonable time would, however, depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. No hard-and-fast law can be laid down
therefor. The conduct of the parties in this behalf would also assume
significance.
*
*
*
35. We, therefore, are of the opinion that interest of justice would
be subserved if this Court refuses to exercise its discretionary
jurisdiction in terms of Section 20 of the Act, directing the defendant
to pay a sum of Rs 60,000 to the plaintiff which sum would include
the amount of advance paid by her."
42. In Saradamani Kandappan19 19 this Court reiterated that:
42.1. While exercising discretion in suits for specific performance,
the courts should bear in mind that when the parties prescribed a time
for taking certain steps or for completion of the transaction, that must
have some significance and therefore time/period prescribed cannot be
ignored.
42.2. The courts will apply greater scrutiny and strictness when
considering whether purchaser was ready and willing to perform his
part of the contract.
42.3. Every suit for specific performance need not be decreed merely
because it is filed within the period of limitation, by ignoring time limits
stipulated in the agreement. The courts will also frown upon suits which
are not filed immediately after the breach/refusal. The fact that
limitation is three years does not mean that a purchaser can wait for
one or two years to file a suit and obtain specific performance. The
three year period is intended to assist the purchaser in special cases, as
for example where the major part of the consideration has been paid to
the vendor and possession has been delivered in part performance,
where equity shifts in favour of the purchaser.
43. In Atma Ram V. Charanjit Singh24 V. Ramasubramanian, J.
p. 316, para 9)
"9.
No explanation was forthcoming from the petitioner for the
long delay of three years, in filing the suit (on 13-10-1999) after
issuing a legal notice on 12-11-1996. The conduct of a plaintiff is
very crucial in a suit for specific performance. A person who issues a
legal notice on 12-11-1996 claiming readiness and willingness, but
who institutes a suit only on 13-10-1999 and that too only with a
prayer for a mandatory injunction carrying a fixed court fee relatable
only to the said relief, will not be entitled to the discretionary relief
of specific performance."
44. The respondent-plaintiff has relied upon the notice dated 13-2-
2003 and evidence of PW 2 and PW 3 to prove that he was always
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. Even though it
may be true that the respondent-plaintiff had deposited the balance
sale consideration in court on 6-4-2010, it cannot be ignored that such
deposit was made by him seven years after 15-3-2003, being the date
by which the sale had to be concluded. No
evidence has been adduced on behalf of the respondent-plaintiff as to
how the respondent-plaintiff was in a position to pay or make
arrangements for payment of the balance sale consideration within
time. The courts below also erred in not adjudicating upon this vital
issue except to make a sweeping observation that, given that the
respondent-plaintiff was a businessman he had sources to arrange the
balance funds. Careful study of balance sheet dated 31-3-2003 of the
respondent-plaintiff would demonstrate that he did not have sufficient
funds to discharge his part of contract.
45. It is settled law that for relief of specific performance, the
plaintiff has to prove that all along and till the final decision of the suit,
he was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. It is the
bounden duty of the plaintiff to prove his readiness and willingness by
adducing evidence. This crucial facet has to be determined by
considering all circumstances including availability of funds and mere
statement or averment in plaint of readiness and willingness, would not
suffice.
46. In this case, the respondent-plaintiff has failed to discharge his
duty to prove his readiness as well as willingness to perform his part of
the contract, by adducing cogent evidence. Acceptable evidence has
not been placed on record to prove his readiness and willingness.
Further, it is clear from the respondent-plaintiff's balance sheet that he
did not have sufficient funds to discharge his part of contract in March
2003. Making subsequent deposit of balance consideration after lapse
of seven years would not establish the respondent-plaintiff's readiness
to discharge his part of contract. Reliance may be placed on Umabai V.
Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan6 wherein this Court speaking through S.B.
Sinha, J. held that deposit of amount in court is not enough to arrive at
conclusion that plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of
contract. Deposit in court would not establish plaintiff's readiness and
willingness within meaning of Section 16(c) of Specific Relief Act. The
45)
"45.
Deposit of any amount in the court at the appellate stage
by the plaintiffs by itself would not establish their readiness and
willingness to perform their part of the contract within the meaning
of Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act."
47. It is, therefore, patently clear that the respondent-plaintiff has
failed to prove his readiness to perform his part of contract from the
date of execution of the agreement till date of decree, which is a
condition precedent for grant of relief of specific performance. This
Court finds that the respondent-plaintiff was not entitled to the relief of
specific performance.
48. The respondent-plaintiff may have been willing to perform his
part of contract. It however appears that he was not ready with funds.
He was possibly trying to buy time to discharge his part of contract.
49. In Bhavyanath V. K.V. Balan 25 cited by Mr Raju to contend that
the respondent-plaintiff was entitled to relief of specific performance
and the courts had rightly granted such relief, the plaintiff had filed the
suit for specific performance three days after the last day for execution
of the sale deed. In this case however, the respondent-plaintiff waited
for nearly 3 years and filed the suit for specific performance just before
expiry of the limitation period. Furthermore, in Bhavyanath V. K.V.
Balan25 the plaintiff had adduced cogent evidence to prove his
readiness and willingness to discharge his part of the contract and to
prove that he had sufficient funds to discharge his obligation. No such
evidence has been adduced by the respondent-plaintiff in this case
either to show his readiness or to prove that sufficient funds were
available with him to enable him to discharge his part of contract.
Therefore, Bhavyanath V. K.V Balan25 is of no assistance to the
respondent-plaintiff.
50. In view of foregoing, this Court is of the considered opinion that
the respondent-plaintiff was not entitled to the relief of specific
performance. The trial court and the High Court erred both in law and
on facts in granting such relief.
51. The appeal is accordingly allowed. The impugned judgment1 of
the High Court and the judgment and decree of trial court are
accordingly set aside. The appellants shall return the earnest money to
the respondent-plaintiff, within 4 weeks from today with interest at the
rate of 7% p.a. from the date of deposit of the same, till the date of
refund. It will also be open to the respondent-plaintiff to withdraw the
deposit if any of the balance consideration in Court. Parties to bear their
own costs.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19463 of 2018. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
High Court, AS No. 262 of 2011, dt. 30-10-2017) [Reversed]
2
3
1355
4
AIR 1928 PC 208
5
6
*
582, p. 584, para 5.
7
8
9
12
14
15
16
18
Cort V. Ambergate, Nottingham, Boston & Eastern Junction Rly. Co., (1851) 17 QB 127
:
117 ER 1229
20
21
22
23
25