The surest way't to legal research!
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE B.R. GAVAI, VIKRAM NATH AND SANJAY KAROL, JJ.)
I.A. Nos. 131377, 147102, 195467, 195468, 205092 of 2022
I.A. Nos. 162283 and 162284 of 2022
In
I.A. D. No. 125746 of 2022
With
I.A. Nos. 118604, 118606, 119400, 119401, 119404, 137132,
137138, 137140 And 137143 of 2022
I.A. Nos. 5764, 6804 and 10911 of 2023
In the Matter of:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad Petitioner
(s);
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondent(s).
I.A. Nos. 131377, 147102, 195467, 195468, 205092 of 2022, I.A.
Nos. 162283 and 162284 of 2022, I.A. D. No. 125746 of 2022, I.A.
Nos. 118604, 118606, 119400, 119401, 119404, 137132, 137138,
137140 And 137143 of 2022, I.A. Nos. 5764, 6804 and 10911 of
2023 and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995
Decided on April 26, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Amicus Curiae Mr. A.D.N. Rao, Sr. Adv.
Mr. K. Parameshwar, Adv.
Mr. M.V Mukunda, Adv.
Ms. Arti Gupta, Adv.
Ms. Kanti, Adv.
Counsel for parties Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, ASG
Ms. Suhasini Sen, Adv.
Ms. Shagun Thakur, Adv.
Ms. Manisha Chava, Adv.
Mr. K.M. Natraj, ASG
Mr. Sharath Nambiar, Adv.
Mr. Vatsal Joshi, Adv.
Mr. Vinayak Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Anuj S. Udupa, Adv.
Mr. Nakul Chengappa, Adv.
Mr. Chitransh Sharma, Adv.
Ms. Indira Bhakar, Adv.
Mr. Gurmeet Singh Makker, AOR
Mr. Shreekant Neelappa Terdal, AOR
Ms. Mrinal Elkar Mazumdar, Adv.
Mr. Mukesh Kr. Verma, Adv.
Mr. Neeraj Kr. Sharma, Adv.
Ms. Indira Bhakar, Adv.
Mr. Harish Pandey, Adv.
Dr. N. Visakamurthy, Adv.
Dr. Manish Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Shubhangi Agarwal, Adv.
Mr. Milind Kumar, AOR
Mr. Jaideep Gupta, Sr.Adv.
Mr. Nishe Rajen Shonker, AOR
Mrs. Anu K Joy, Adv.
Mr. Alim Anvar, Adv.
Mr. Chanchal Kumar Ganguli, AOR
M/s. PLR Chambers And Co., AOR
Mr. Syed Mehdi Imam, AOR
Mr. T. Harish Kumar, AOR
M/s. Mitter & Mitter Co., AOR
M/s. Lawyer S Knit & Co, AOR
Mr. Raj Kishor Choudhary, AOR
Mr. Shuvodeep Roy, AOR
Mr. Sai Shashank, Adv.
Mr. Deepayan Dutta, Adv.
Mr. Gaichangpou Gangmei, AOR
Mr. Abhishek Chaudhary, AOR
Mr. S. R. Setia, AOR
Ms. Charu Mathur, AOR
Mr. A. Venayagam Balan, AOR
Mr. C. L. Sahu, AOR
Ms. Sumita Hazarika, AOR
Ms. Abha R. Sharma, AOR
Ms. Asha Gopalan Nair, AOR
Mr. E. M. S. Anam, AOR
Ms. K. V. Bharathi Upadhyaya, AOR
!
Mr. Rajiv Mehta, AOR
Mr. T. V. George, AOR
Mr. Krishnanand Pandeya, AOR
Mr. Neeraj Shekhar, AOR
Dr. Sumit Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Keshav Baheti, Adv.
Mr. Harsh Narwal, Adv.
Mr. Sudhir Kulshreshtha, AOR
Ms. Binu Tamta, AOR
Mr. B V Deepak, AOR
Mr. T. N. Singh, AOR
Mr. Punit Dutt Tyagi, AOR
Mr. Rathin Das, AOR
Mr. Ratan Kumar Choudhuri, AOR
Mr. G. Prakash, AOR
Mr. Rauf Rahim, AOR
Mrs. Rekha Pandey, AOR
Mr. Gopal Singh, AOR
Mr. Sudhir Kumar Gupta, AOR
Mr. A. N. Arora, AOR
Mr. Irshad Ahmad, AOR
Ms. C. K. Sucharita, AOR
Mrs. Anjani Aiyagari, AOR
Ms. Hemantika Wahi, AOR
Mr. Mohd. Irshad Hanif, AOR
Mr. Amar Kumar Raizada, Adv.
Ms. Ruby Mohd Wasim, Adv.
Ms. Mala Diwedi, Adv.
Ms. Pinky, Adv.
Mr. P. V. Yogeswaran, AOR
Mr. Jitendra Mohan Sharma, AOR
Ms. Malini Poduval, AOR
Mr. Jai Prakash Pandey, AOR
Mr. Ajit Pudussery, AOR
Mr. Pradeep Kumar Bakshi, AOR
Mr. K. L. Janjani, AOR
Mr. Naresh K. Sharma, AOR
Ms. A. Sumathi, AOR
Mr. Radha Shyam Jena, AOR
Mr. Ram Swarup Sharma, AOR
1
Mrs. Bina Gupta, AOR
Mrs. Rani Chhabra, AOR
Ms. Divya Roy, AOR
Mr. Tarun Johri, AOR
Mr. S. C. Birla, AOR
Mr. P. R. Ramasesh, AOR
Mr. Shibashish Misra, AOR
M/s. Parekh & Co., AOR
M/s. K J John And Co, AOR
Mr. Pratap Venugopal, Adv.
Ms. Surekha Raman, Adv.
Mr. Akhil Abraham Roy, Adv.
Mr. Abhishek Anand, Adv.
Mr. V. Balachandran, AOR
Ms. Baby Krishnan, AOR
Ms. Bina Madhavan, AOR
Mr. K. V. Vijayakumar, AOR
Mr. Umesh Bhagwat, AOR
Mrs. M. Qamaruddin, AOR
Mr. H. S. Parihar, AOR
Mr. Kuldip Singh, AOR
Mr. Ranjan Mukherjee, AOR
Mr. Ashok Mathur, AOR
Mr. P. N. Gupta, AOR
Mr. Sarad Kumar Singhania, AOR
Mr. E. C. Agrawala, AOR
Mr. S.. Udaya Kumar Sagar, AOR
Ms. Madhu Moolchandani, AOR
Mr. T. Mahipal, AOR
Mr. Rajat Joseph, AOR
Mr. Vijay Kari Singh, Adv.
Mr. Hrishikesh Chitaley, Adv.
Mr. Gopal Prasad, AOR
Ms. Jyoti Mendiratta, AOR
Mr. Raj Kumar Mehta, AOR
M/s. M. V. Kini & Associates, AOR
Mr. Rakesh K. Sharma, AOR
Ms. S. Janani, AOR
M/s. Arputham Aruna And Co, AOR
Mrs. Nandini Gore, AOR
he surest way to legal research! 1
Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, AOR
Ms. Pratibha Jain, AOR
Mr. Tejaswi Kumar Pradhan, AOR
Mrs. Kanchan Kaur Dhodi, AOR
Mr. Surya Kant, AOR
Mr. E. C. Vidya Sagar, AOR
Ms. Sujata Kurdukar, AOR
Ms. Sharmila Upadhyay, AOR
Mr. Rajeev Singh, AOR
Mr. Prashant Kumar, AOR
Mr. Dharmendra Kumar Sinha, AOR
Mr. P. Parmeswaran, AOR
Mr. Shiva Pujan Singh, AOR
Mr. Rajesh Singh, AOR
Mrs. B. Sunita Rao, AOR
Mr. Kamal Mohan Gupta, AOR
Mr. Sudarsh Menon, AOR
Mr. Ramesh Babu M. R., AOR
Mr. Vikrant Singh Bais, AOR
Mr. Lakshmi Raman Singh, AOR
Mr. Himanshu Shekhar, AOR
Mr. Parth Shekhar, Adv.
Mr. Shubham Singh, Adv.
Ms. Monica Haseja, Adv.
Ms. Md Sontu Mia, Adv.
Ms. Purva, Adv.
Ms. Arun Kumar Jaiswal, Adv.
Mrs. Manik Karanjawala, AOR
Mr. M. C. Dhingra, AOR
Mr. Ejaz Maqbool, AOR
Mr. Rajesh, AOR
M/s. Corporate Law Group, AOR
Mr. M. Yogesh Kanna, AOR
Mr. Kaushik Choudhury, AOR
Dr. Manish Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Sandeep Kumar Jha, AOR
Ms. Anzu. K. Varkey, AOR
Mr. Vivek Jain, AOR
Mr. Abhishek Atrey, AOR
Dr. Abhishek Atrey, Adv.
The surest way to legal research 1
Ms. Vidyottma Jha, Adv.
Mr. M. R. Shamshad, AOR
Mr. Ajay Marwah, AOR
Mr. Adhitya Srinivasan, Adv.
Mr. Tapan Masta, Adv.
Mr. Sanjay Shukla, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
Ms. Shreya Saxena, Adv.
Ms. Yamini Singh, Adv.
Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
Mr. Naveen Kumar, AOR
Mr. Guntur Pramod Kumar, AOR
Ms. Mayuri Raghuvanshi, AOR
Mr. Sanjay Upadhyay, Adv.
Mr. Salik Shafique, Adv.
Mr. Kazi Sangay Thupden, Adv.
Ms. Eisha Krishna, Adv.
Ms. Mansi Bacheni, Adv.
M/s. V. Maheshwari & Co., AOR
M/s. Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas, AOR
Mr. Abhinav Mukerji, AOR
Ms. Ruchira Goel, AOR
Ms. Surbhi Mehta, AOR
Ms. Adarsh Nain, AOR
Mr. Kumar Anurag Singh, Adv.
Mr. Anando Mukherjee, AOR
Ms. Tulika Mukherjee, Adv.
Mr. Shwetank Singh, Adv.
Mr. Siddhartha Jha, AOR
Mr. A. Karthik, AOR
Ms. Seita Vaidyalingam, AOR
M/s. Venkat Palwai Law Associates, AOR
Mr. Vinod Sharma, AOR
Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, AOR
Ms. Devyani Bhatt, Adv.
Mr. Nishanth Patil, AOR
Mr. Chirag M. Shroff, AOR
Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., AOR
Mr. Nishit Agrawal, AOR
Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, AOR
Mr. Narendra Kumar, AOR
Mr. Raghvendra Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Anand Kumar Dubey, Adv.
Mr. S. Gowthaman, AOR
Mr. Sandeep Rana, Adv
Ms. Sabina Shahid, Adv.
Mr. Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Adv.
Mr. Kamlendra Mishra, AOR
Mr. Somesh Chandra Jha, AOR
Mr. Sunil Kumar Sharma, AOR
Mr. P. S. Sudheer, AOR
Mr. Sunny Choudhary, AOR
Mrs. Kirti Renu Mishra, AOR
Dr. Monika Gusain, AOR
Mr. P. K. Manohar, AOR
Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, Adv.
Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, AOR
Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, AOR
Mr. Vaibhav Sabharwal, Adv.
Mr. Akshay Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Naveen Kumar, AOR
Mr. James P. Thomas, AOR
Mr. Saket Singh, Adv.
Mrs. Sangeeta Singh, Adv.
Mrs. Niranjana Singh, AOR
Mr. Dhaval Mehrotra, AOR
Mr. B. K. Pal, AOR
Ms. Shalini Kaul, AOR
Mr. Sarvam Ritam Khare, AOR
Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, AOR
Mr. Shubhranshu Padhi, AOR
Mr. Aravindh S., AOR
Ms. Uma Bhuvaneswari.c, Adv.
Mr. Abbas, Adv.
M/s. D.S.K. Legal, AOR
Ms. Purnima Krishna, AOR
Mrs. Pragya Baghel, AOR
Mrinal Gopal Elker, AOR
Mr. Devvrat Singh, Adv.
Ms. Astha Sharma, AOR
Mr. Gopal Balwant Sathe, AOR
Mr. V. N. Raghupathy, AOR
Mr. Manendra Pal Gupta, Adv.
Mr. Amrish Kumar, AOR
Mr. M.K.S. Menon, Adv.
Ms. Usha Nandini V., Adv.
Mr. Biju P. Raman, Adv.
Mr. Ravi Lamod, Adv.
Mr. Arun Kumar Jaiswal, Adv.
Mr. Ravindra S. Garia, AOR
Mr. Shashank Singh, Adv.
Mr. Madan Chandra Karnatka, Adv.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.R. GAVAI, J. -
I.A. NO. 131377 OF 2022:
1. The present I.A. is filed by the Union of India praying for
modification/clarification of the order passed by this Court dated 3rd
June 20221 in I.A. No. 1000 of 2003 in WP(C) No. 202 of 1995.
2. The applicant specifically seeks modification of the directions
contained in paragraphs 56.1 and 56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022
(supra). The said paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow:
"56.1. Each protected forest, that is, national park or wildlife
sanctuary must have an ESZ of minimum one kilometre measured
from the demarcated boundary of such protected forest in which the
activities proscribed and prescribed in the Guidelines of 9-2-2011
shall be strictly adhered to. For Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary,
it shall be 500 m so far as subsisting activities are concerned.
56.5. In the event any activity is already being undertaken within
the one kilometre or extended buffer zone (ESZ), as the case may
be, of any wildlife sanctuary or national park which does not come
within the ambit of prohibited activities as per the 9-2-2011
Guidelines, such activities may continue with permission of the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of each State or Union Territory
and the person responsible for such activities in such a situation
shall obtain necessary permission within a period of six months.
Such permission shall be given once the Principal Chief Conservator
of Forests is satisfied that the activities concerned do not come
within the prohibited list and were continuing prior to passing of this
order in a legitimate manner. No new permanent structure shall be
permitted to come up for whatsoever purpose within the ESZ."
3. The clarification/modification of paragraph 56.1 of the order dated
3rd June 2022 (supra) is sought to the extent that the Eco-Sensitive
Zones (for short, "ESZs") which have already been notified (final and
draft) by the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change (for
short, "MoEF & CC") or the proposals for which have been received in
the Ministry be exempted from the directions therein. The applicant
also sought modification to the extent that paragraph 56.1 of the order
dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) may not be made applicable where
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries are located along inter-State
boundaries and/or common boundaries. Modification/clarification of the
directions in paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) in
its entirety is additionally sought.
4. We have heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor
General (for short, "ASG") appearing on behalf of the applicant, Shri K.
Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae as well as Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of various State Governments.
5. It is submitted that the Government of India has already issued
Guidelines on 9th February 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the "said
Guidelines") for declaration of ESZs around National Parks and Wildlife
Sanctuaries. The said Guidelines were framed after consulting the
National Board for Wildlife (hereinafter referred to as "NBWL"), and all
the State and Union Territory Governments. The said Guidelines provide
a detailed procedure for submitting a proposal for declaration of the
areas around National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as ESZs. It is
further submitted that the said Guidelines itself contain various
activities which have been categorized as prohibited, regulated and
permitted.
6. It is further submitted that the direction as contained in
paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is likely to
cause great hardship to the citizens residing in the ESZs. It is further
submitted that the said directions provide that if any activity is already
being undertaken within one kilometre or extended buffer zone (ESZ),
and which does not come within the ambit of prohibited activities as
per the said Guidelines, such activities may continue with the
permission of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (for short,
"PCCF") of each State or Union Territory and the person responsible for
such activities in such a situation shall obtain necessary permission
within a period of six months. The said Guidelines further provide that
such permission shall be given once the PCCF is satisfied that the
activities concerned do not come within the prohibited list and were
continuing prior to passing of this Court's order dated 3rd June 2022
(supra) in a legitimate manner. It is further submitted that the
direction that no new permanent structure shall be permitted to come
up for whatsoever purpose within the ESZs would also cause great
hardship.
7. It is further submitted that insofar as the direction in paragraph
56.1 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is concerned, it
mandates that each protected forest, that is, National Park or Wildlife
Sanctuary, must have an ESZ of minimum one kilometre measured
from the demarcated boundary of such protected forest in which the
activities proscribed and prescribed in the said Guidelines shall be
strictly adhered to. Insofar as Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary is
concerned, it is directed that the ESZ shall be 500 meters so far as
subsisting activities are concerned.
8. The learned ASG, amicus curiae and Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of various States submitted that in respect of various National
Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries, already final notifications had been
issued, prescribing the boundaries for the ESZs. In some cases, the
draft notifications are pending and in some other cases, the proposals
for issuance of draft and final notifications are pending with the
Government of India.
9. It is submitted that there cannot be a uniform boundary for all the
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. It is further submitted that
there cannot also be a uniform boundary for a particular National Park
or Wildlife Sanctuary. At times, it may be longer on one side and
shorter on the other side depending on various circumstances.
10. It is submitted that the rights of the citizens who are residing in
the Protected Areas are settled under the provisions of Sections 18 to
25A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as
"1972 Act") whereas there is no settlement of rights of citizens residing
in ESZs. The citizens therein continue to reside and are also continuing
with their daily avocation like farming etc. It is submitted that various
developmental activities like construction of schools, dispensaries,
anganwadis, public health centres etc. are required to be undertaken in
such areas. Not only that, but if the direction not to make any
construction is continued, the persons residing therein would not be in
a position to construct or reconstruct houses on their own land. It is
submitted that the procedure prescribed for obtaining the permission of
the PCCF is very tedious. If such a direction is issued, the PCCF would
be left with no other work but to consider the applications for
continuation of such activities.
11. It is further submitted that though this Court has observed in
paragraph 54 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) that the said
Guidelines are reasonable, it has nevertheless issued directions which
are in conflict with the said Guidelines.
12. It is further contended that the issue in I.A. No. 1000 of 2003
was restricted to prohibition of mining activities in and around Jamua
Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary and prescribing ESZs for the said Wildlife
Sanctuary only. As such, various State Governments did not have an
opportunity to address this Court.
13. Having considered the rival submissions, we find it appropriate
to refer to various orders passed by this Court on the issue of
ESZs/Buffer Zones.
14. The first of such orders was passed by this Court on 16th
September 20052 It will be relevant to refer to paragraph 13 of the
said order, which reads thus:
"13. We have perused the affidavit dated 14-9-2005 filed by Mr
Anurag Bajpai on behalf of MoEF and the statement showing the
grant of temporary working permit in the last two years i.e. from 1-1
-2003 to 31-12-2004 in the national parks, sanctuaries and forest
area. This is despite the order passed by this Court restraining the
mining activities in these areas. Learned amicus curiae submits that
the inspection of the government record shows a dismal picture and
he would shortly file an application for taking appropriate action
against the persons concerned. Pending filing of the said application
and further orders, we again reiterate that without compliance with
the environmental laws, in particular the permission under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, no temporary working permission or
temporary permit or any other permission by whatever name called
shall be granted for mining activities in the aforesaid areas. We
further direct that no mining activity would continue under
any temporary working permit or permission which may have
been granted. appears from the chart filed with the affidavit
of Mr Anurag Bajpai that no temporary working permission is
in operation as of today. If it is otherwise, an affidavit to that
effect shall be filed within two weeks giving the particulars of
such permission."
[emphasis supplied]
15. It can thus clearly be seen that this Court directed that no
mining activity would be permitted to continue under any temporary
working permit or permission which may have been granted.
16. It will further be relevant to refer paragraph 15 of the said order,
which reads thus:
"15. MoEF is directed to place on record within three weeks its
viewpoint on the question of area of buffer zone and other related
matters such as should it be universal or place specific. This should
be done after also obtaining the viewpoint of the National Board of
Wildlife."
17. It can thus be seen from the said paragraph that this Court
directed MoEF to place on record within three weeks its viewpoint on
the question of area of buffer zone and other related matters such as
should it be universal or place specific. The Court further directed that
this should be done after obtaining the viewpoint of the NBWL.
18. The second of such orders is passed on 4th August 20063 The
said order basically pertains to banning the mining activities in the
National Parks, Sanctuaries and forest areas. The Court laid down
various pre-conditions wherein temporary working permits could be
granted.
19. The next order is passed on 4 December 20064 In the said
order, the Court expressed its anguish towards the various State
Governments for not responding to the letter issued by MoEF dated 27th
May 2005 requiring them to initiate measures for identification of
suitable areas and submit detailed proposals at the earliest. It will be
relevant to refer to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the said order, which read
thus:
"3. The order earlier passed on 30-1-2006 [Goa Foundation V.
taken on 21-1-2002 to notify the areas within 10 km of the
boundaries of national parks and sanctuaries as eco-sensitive areas.
The Letter dated 27-5-2005 is a departure from the decision of 21-1-
2002. For the present, in this case, we are not considering the
correctness of this departure. That is being examined in another case
separately. Be that as it may, it is evident that the States/Union
Territories have not given the importance that is required to be given
to most of the laws to protect environment made after Rio
Declaration, 1992.
4. The Ministry is directed to give a final opportunity to all
States/Union Territories to respond to its Letter dated 27-5-2005.
The State of Goa also is permitted to give appropriate proposal in
addition to what is said to have already been sent to the Central
Government. The communication sent to the States/Union Territories
shall make it clear that if the proposals are not sent even now within
a period of four weeks of receipt of the communication from the
Ministry, this Court may have to consider passing orders for
implementation of the decision that was taken on 21-1-2002,
namely, notification of the areas within 10 km of the boundaries of
the sanctuaries and national parks as eco-sensitive areas with a view
to conserve the forest, wildlife and environment, and having regard
to the precautionary principles. If the States/Union Territories now
fail to respond, they would do so at their own risk and peril."
20. It can be seen that this Court refers to its earlier order dated
30th January 2006 wherein a reference is made to the decision dated
21s January 2002 to notify the areas within 10 kilometres of the
boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries as ESZs. Though the
order records that the letter dated 27t May 2005 is a departure from
the decision taken on 21s st January 2002, the Court observes that, in
the said case, the Court was not considering the correctness of the said
departure. The Court therefore directed the Ministry to give a final
opportunity to all States/Union Territories to respond to its Letter dated
27th May 2005. The said order states that the communication should
mention that if the proposals were not sent within a period of four
weeks from the receipt of the communication from the Ministry, this
Court may have to consider passing orders for implementation of the
decision that was taken on 21 st January 2002, i.e., notification of the
areas within 10 kilometres of the boundaries of the sanctuaries and
National Parks as ESZs.
21. The next order of this Court is dated 21 April 2014 in the case
of Goa Foundation V. Union of India5. It will be relevant to refer to the
following observations of this Court in the said order:
"49.
The result is that the order passed by this Court saying
that there will be no mining activity within one kilometre safety zone
around national park or wildlife sanctuary has to be enforced and
there can be no mining activities within this area of one kilometre
from the boundaries of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in the
State of Goa."
22. The Court has clarified that there shall be no mining activity
within one kilometre of the safety zone around National Park or Wildlife
Sanctuary and that this has to be enforced. It is also reiterated that
there can be no mining activities within this area of one kilometre from
the boundaries of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the State of
Goa.
23. The Court thereafter refers to the earlier order dated 4th
December 2006 (supra) in the said case and observed thus:
"50.
It will be clear from the order dated 4-12-2006 [Goa
this Court has not passed any orders for implementation of the
decision taken on 21-1-2002 to notify areas within 10 km of the
boundaries of national parks or wildlife sanctuaries as eco-sensitive
areas with a view to conserve the forest, wildlife and environment.
By the order dated 4-12-2006 [Goa Foundation V. Union of India,
Environment and Forests, Government of India, was directed to give
a final opportunity to all States/Union Territories to respond to the
proposal and also to refer to the Standing Committee of the National
Board for Wildlife the cases in which environment clearance has
already been granted in respect of activities within the 10 km zone
from the boundaries of the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks.
There is, therefore, no direction, interim or final, of this Court
prohibiting mining activities within 10 km of the boundaries of
national parks or wildlife sanctuaries."
24. It could thus be seen that the Court has specifically observed
that this Court had not passed any orders for implementation of the
decision taken on 21 st January 2002 to notify areas within 10
kilometres of the boundaries of National Parks or Wildlife Sanctuaries as
ESZs with a view to conserve the forest, wildlife and environment. The
Court therefore clarified that there is no direction, interim or final,
prohibiting mining activities within 10 kilometres of the boundaries of
National Parks or Wildlife Sanctuaries.
25. It will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 87.3 and 88.1 of the
said order, which read thus:
"87,3. Until the order dated 4-8-2006 [T.N. Godavarman
modified by this Court in IA No. 1000 in T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulpad V. Union of India, there can be no mining activities
within one kilometre from the boundaries of national parks and
sanctuaries in Goa.
88.1. MoEF will issue the notification of eco-sensitive zones
around the national park and wildlife sanctuaries of Goa after
following the procedure discussed in this judgment within a period of
six months from today."
26. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that until the order
dated 4th August 2006 (supra) is modified by this Court in IA No. 1000
of 2003 in the case of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V. Union of India,
there can be no mining activities within one kilometre from the
boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries in Goa. The Court further
directed MoEF to issue the notification of ESZs around the National Park
and Wildlife Sanctuaries of Goa after following the procedure discussed
in the said judgment. The same was directed to be done within a period
of six months from the date of the said order.
27. The next relevant order would be dated 11 th December 2018. It
will be relevant to refer to the following part of the said order:
"The learned ASG has informed us that there are 104 National
Parks and 558 Wildlife Sanctuaries making a total of 662 National
Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the country.
The proposals for declaring areas around these National Parks and
Wildlife Sanctuaries as Eco Sensitive Zone have been received from
State Governments/UT Administrations for 641 National Parks and
Wildlife Sanctuaries. No proposals have been received in respect of
21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
The proposals have been accepted and Notification has been
issued in respect of 289 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as
on 26.11.2018 and draft Notification has been prepared in respect of
206 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
The declaration with regard to Eco Sensitive Zone is under process
with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
(MoEF) as well as with the State Governments in respect of 4146
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
We expect the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change to actively pursue the preparation of the draft Notification
and to issue a final Notification at the earliest.
The proposals for 21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in
respect of which proposals have not yet been received by the MOEF
are as follows:-
It is submitted by the learned Amicus that this issue has been
pending since sometime in December, 2006. 12 years have gone-by
but no effective steps have been taken by the State Governments in
respect of the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries mentioned
above.
Under the circumstances, we direct that an area of 10 Kms around
these 21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries be declared as Eco
Sensitive Zone by the MoEF. The declaration be made by the MoEF at
the earliest.
Liberty is granted to the State Governments to move an
application for modification of this order along with proposal only two
weeks after submission of the proposals to the MoEF."
28. It can be seen that this Court has recorded the submissions of
the learned ASG that there were 104 National Parks and 558 Wildlife
Sanctuaries making a total of 662 National Parks and Wildlife
Sanctuaries in the country. It was further recorded that the proposals
for declaring areas around these National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries
as ESZs had been received from the State Governments/Union
Territories. It can further be seen that no proposals have been received
in respect of 21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. It further
recorded that the proposals had been accepted and notification had
been issued in respect of 289 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries as
on 26th November 2018 and draft notification had been prepared in
respect of 206 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. The Court
therefore expected the MoEF & CC to actively pursue the preparation of
the draft Notification and to issue a final Notification at the earliest. The
Court then recorded 21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in
respect of which proposals have not yet been received by the MoEF &
CC alongside its anguish that though 12 years had been passed, no
effective steps have been taken by the State Governments in respect of
the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries named in the said order.
Therefore, the Court directed that an area of 10 kilometres around
these 21 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries be declared as ESZs
by the MoEF & CC. Liberty was granted to the State Governments to
move an application for modification of the said order. However, it
further directed that the application should be along with the proposal
for declaration of ESZs.
29. It is to be noted that the learned Judges of this Court, in the
case of Goa Foundation6, had directed that the MoEF & CC shall follow
the procedure and issue notification of ESZs under Rule 5 of the
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as "1986
Rules"). The relevant provisions of the 1986 Rules are reproduced
hereinbelow:
"5. Prohibition and restriction on the location of industries
and the carrying on of processes and operations in different
areas.-(1) The Central Government may take into consideration the
following factors while prohibiting or restricting the location of
industries and carrying on of processes and operations in different
areas:
(i) Standards for quality of environment in its various aspects laid
down for an area.
(ii) The maximum allowable limits of concentration of various
environmental pollutants (including noise) for an area.
(iii) The likely emission or discharge of environmental pollutants
from an industry, process or operation proposed to be
prohibited or restricted.
(iv) The topographic and climatic features of an area.
(v.) The biological diversity of the area which, in the opinion of the
Central Government needs to be preserved.
(vi) Environmentally compatible land use.
(vii) Net adverse environmental impact likely to be caused by an
industry, process or operation proposed to be prohibited or
restricted.
(viii) Proximity to a protected area under the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 or a sanctuary,
National Park, game reserve or closed area notified as such under
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 or places protected under any
treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or
countries or in pursuance of any decision made in any
international conference, association or other body.
(ix) Proximity to human settlements.
(x) Any other factor as may be considered by the Central
Government to be relevant to the protection of the environment
in an area.
(2) While prohibiting or restricting the location of industries and
carrying on of processes and operations in an area, the Central
Government shall follow the procedure hereinafter laid down.
(3) (a) Whenever it appears to the Central Government that it is
expedient to impose prohibition or restrictions on the location of an
industry or the carrying on of processes and operations in an area, it
may, by notification in the Official Gazette and in such other manner
as the Central Government may deem necessary from time to time,
give notice of its intention to do SO.
(b) Every notification under clause (a) shall give a brief
description of the area, the industries, operations, processes in
that area about which such notification pertains and also specify
the reasons for the imposition of prohibition or restrictions on the
location of the industries and carrying on of processes or
operations in that area. (c) Any person interested in filing an
objection against the imposition of prohibition or restrictions on
carrying on of processes or operations as notified under clause (a)
may do so in writing to the Central Government within sixty days
from the date of publication in the notification in the Official
Gazette.
(d) The Central Government shall within a period of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of publication of the
notification in the Official Gazette consider all the objections
received against such notification and may [within [seven
hundred and twenty-five days [, and in respect of the States of
Assam, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur,
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim and Jammu and Kashmir in exceptional
circumstance and for sufficient reasons within a further period of
one hundred and eighty days, ]] from such date of publication]
impose prohibition or restrictions on location of such industries
and the carrying on of any process or operation in an area:
[Provided that on account of COVID-19 pandemic, for the purpose
of this clause, the period of validity of the notification expiring in the
financial year 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 shall be extended up to
[30th June, 2022] or six months from the end of the month when the
relevant notification would have expired without any extension,
whichever is later. ]
[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3),
whenever it appears to the Central Government that it is in public
interest to do so, it may dispense with the requirement of notice
under clause (a) of sub-rule (3). ]"
30. It is to be noted that Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules prescribes a
detailed procedure for issuing notification prohibiting or restricting
various activities in the specified areas. The said power flows from
Sections 3(v) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter
referred to as "1986 Act").
31. A perusal of clause (viii) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the 1986
Rules would reveal that one of the factors that has to be taken into
consideration for declaring ESZ is the proximity to a sanctuary, National
Park, game reserve or closed area notified, as such under the 1972 Act.
Sub-rule 3(a) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules requires that whenever it
appears to the Central Government that it is expedient to impose
prohibition or restrictions, it is required to give notice of its intention to
do so by notification in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as
the Central Government may deem necessary from time to time. As per
sub-rule 3(b) of Rule 5, every such notification is required to give a
brief description of the area, the industries, operations processes in that
area about which such notification pertains and also specify the reasons
for the imposition of prohibition or restrictions on the location of the
industries on carrying out of the processes or operations in that area.
Accordingly, as per sub-rule 3(c) of Rule 5, any person interested in
filing an objection is entitled to file an objection to the Central
Government within sixty days from the date of publication in the
notification in the Official Gazette. The Central Government thereafter
within the prescribed period provided under clause (d) of sub-rule (3)
of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules is required to issue a notification in the
Official Gazette imposing such prohibition or restrictions in an area. This
is required to be done only after considering all the objections received
under clause (c) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules. It can thus
be seen that a detailed procedure is prescribed under the 1986 Rules
for notifying ESZs.
32. It is to be noted that MoEF & CC has issued the said Guidelines
for declaration of ESZs around the National Parks and Wildlife
Sanctuaries.
33. The said Guidelines refer to a meeting of the Indian Board for
Wildlife held on 21 st January 2002, in which "Wildlife Conservation
Strategy-2002" was adopted. Point No. 9 of the said Strategy
envisaged that lands falling within 10 kilometres of the boundaries of
National Parks and Sanctuaries should be notified as eco-fragile zones
under Section 3(v) of the 1972 Act and clause (viii) of sub-rule (1) of
Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules. It further states that when the views were
obtained from all the State Governments, some of the State
Governments had raised concern over applicability of 10 kilometres
range from the Protected Area boundary and informed that most of the
human habitation and other areas including important cities in these
States would come under the purview of ESZs and will adversely affect
the development. The said Guidelines also refer to the National Wildlife
Action Plan (2002-2016). The NBWL, in its meeting held on 17th March
2005, decided that the delineation of ESZs would have to be site
specific and relate to regulation rather than prohibition of specific
activities. The said decision was communicated to all the State
Governments for compliance vide letter dated 27th May 2005.
34. The said Guidelines thereafter refer to the directions of this Court
dated 4th December 2006. It also refers to the statutory provisions as
contained in Section 5C (1) of the 1972 Act, Section 3 of the 1986 Act
and Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules. The said Guidelines state that the
purpose of declaring ESZs around National Parks and Sanctuaries is to
create some kind of Shock Absorber for the Protected Areas. They would
also act as a transition zone from areas of high protection to areas
involving lesser protection. It also reiterates the decision of the NBWL
that the activities in the ESZs would be of a regulatory nature rather
than prohibitive nature unless and otherwise so required. Paragraph 4
of the said Guidelines notes that many of the existing Protected Areas
have already undergone tremendous development in close vicinity to
their boundaries. It refers to the Guindy National Park, Tamil Nadu,
Sanjay Gandhi National Park, Maharashtra, etc. and notes that the
Protected Areas are lying in the urban set up. It therefore observes that
defining the extent of ESZs around Protected Areas will have to be kept
flexible and Protected Area specific. It notes that the width of ESZs and
type of regulations will differ from one Protected Area to another
Protected Area. It however notes that, as a general principle, the width
of the ESZs could go up to 10 kilometres around a Protected Area as
provided in the Wildlife Conservation Strategy-2002. It further notes
that in case where sensitive corridors, connectivity and ecologically
important patches, crucial for landscape linkage, are even beyond 10
kilometres width, these should be included in the ESZs. It further notes
that even in context of a particular Protected Area, the distribution of
an area of the ESZ and the extent of regulation may not be uniform all
around and it could be of variable width and extent. The said Guidelines
notes that though the directions were issued by this Court to all the
States/Union Territories, except a few States, several other
States/Union Territories have not come forward with the proposals for
declaration of ESZs. It was observed that this could be perhaps for
want of guidelines in this regard. It further notes that this Court in its
judgment and order dated 3rd December 2010 in a case relating to
construction of park at Noida near Okhla Bird Sanctuary, observed that
the ESZs around the Protected Areas had not been notified as the
Government of India had not issued any guidelines in this regard.
35. It thereafter refers to the Committee under the Chairmanship of
Shri Pronab Sen for identifying parameters for designating Ecologically
Sensitive Areas in India.
36. The said Guidelines thereafter state in paragraph 6 that the
basic aim of notifying ESZs is to regulate certain activities around
National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary so as to minimize the negative
impact of such activities on the fragile ecosystem encompassing the
Protected Area. It states that the first step towards it is to prepare an
inventory of the different land use patterns and the different types of
activities, types and number of industries operating around each of the
Protected Area as well as important Corridors. It states that the
inventory could be done by the concerned Range Officers, who can take
a stock of activities within 10 kilometres of the range. It further notes
that a Committee comprising of the concerned Wildlife Warden, an
Ecologist, an official from the Local Self Government and an official of
the Revenue Department of the concerned area, could be formed to
suggest the following:
(i) Extent of eco-sensitive zones for the Protected Area being
considered.
(ii) The requirement of such a zone to act as a shock absorber
(iii) To suggest the best methods for management of the eco-
sensitive zones, so suggested.
(iv) To suggest broad based thematic activities to be included in the
Master Plan for the region.
37. It further notes that based on the above, the Chief Wildlife
Warden could group the activities under the following categories: -
(i) Prohibited
(ii) Restricted with safeguards.
(iii) Permissible
38. The said Guidelines thereafter note that once the proposal for
ESZs has been finalized, the same should be forwarded to the MoEF &
CC for further processing and notification. An indicative list of details
that need to be submitted along with the proposals is also appended to
the said Guidelines.
39. The said Guidelines further note that where the boundary of a
Protected Area abuts the boundary of another State/Union Territory
where it does not form part of any Protected Area, it should be the
endeavour of both the State/Union Territory Governments to have a
mutual consultation and decide upon the width of the ESZs around the
Protected Area in question. The said Guidelines emphasize that the
State Government should endeavour to convey a very strong message
to the public that ESZs are not meant to hamper their day to day
activities, but instead, are meant to protect the precious
forests/Protected Areas in their locality from any negative impact, and
also to refine the environment around the Protected Areas. It further
notes that these guidelines are indicative in nature and the State/Union
Territory Governments may use these as basic framework to develop
specific guidelines applicable in the context of their National Parks,
Wildlife Sanctuaries, important corridors etc. with a view to minimizing
and preferably eliminating any negative impact on Protected Areas.
40. A list of the activities which are prohibited, regulated and
permitted is contained in Annexure-I of the said Guidelines, which
reads thus:
SI.
Activity
Prohibited
Regulated
Permitted
Remarks
No.
1.
Commercial
Y
Regulation sill
mining
not prohibit
the digging of
earth
for
construction
or repair of
houses for
manufacture
of
country
tiles or bricks
for housing
for personal
2.
Felling
of
Y
With
trees
permission
from
appropriate
authority
3.
Setting of
Y
saw mills
4.
Setting of
Y
industries
causing
pollution
(Water, Air,
Soil., Noise,
etc.)
5.
Establishme
Y
As
per
nt of hotels
approved
and resorts
master plan,
which takes
care
of
habitats
allowing no
restriction on
movement of
wild animals
6.
Commercial
Y
For
hotels
use
of
and
other
firewood
business
related
establishment
7.
Drastic
Y
change of
agriculture
systems
8.
Commercial
Y
As
per
use
of
approved
natural
master
plan,
water
which
takes
resources
care
of
including
habitats
ground
allowing no
water
restriction on
harvesting
movement of
wild animals.
9.
Establishme
Y
nt of major
hydroelectric
projects
10.
Erection
of
Y
Promote
electrical
underground
cable
cabling
11.
Ongoing
Y
However,
agriculture
excessive
and
expansion of
horticulture
some of these
practices
activities
local
should
be
communities
regulated
as
per
the
master plan
12.
Rain Water
Y
Should
be
harvesting
actively
promoted
13.
Fencing of
Y
premises of
hotels and
lodges
14.
Organic
Y
Should
be
farming
actively
promoted
15.
Use
of
Y
polythene
bags
by
shopkeepers
16.
Use
of
Y
Should
be
renewable
actively
energy
promoted
sources
17.
Widening of
Y
This should
roads
be done with
proper
EIA
and
mitigation
measures
18.
Movement of
Y
For
vehicular
commercial
traffic
at
purpose
night
19.
Introduction
Y
of
exotic
species
20.
Use
of
Y
production
of
any
hazardous
substances
21.
Undertaking
activities
related
to
tourism like
over-flying
the National
Park are by
any aircraft,
hot-air
balloons
22.
Protection of
Y
As per the
hill slopes
master plan
and river
banks
23.
Discharge of
Y
effluents
and
solid
waste
in
natural
water bodies
or terrestrial
are
24.
Air
and
Y
vehicular
pollution
25.
Sign board
Y
As per the
& hoardings
master plan
26.
Adoption of
Y
Should be
green
actively
technology
promoted.
for
all
activities
41. It is to be noted that this Court in paragraph 54 of the order
dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) has, in fact, held the said Guidelines to be
reasonable and also accepted the view of the Standing Committee of
the NBWL that uniform guidelines may not be possible in respect of
each sanctuary or National Park for maintaining the ESZs. It is also
observed that the sanctuaries like Sanjay Gandhi National Park and
Guindy National Park in Mumbai shall form special cases. The said
paragraph 54 is reproduced hereinunder:
"54. In our opinion, the Guidelines framed on 9-2-2011 appear to
be reasonable and we accept the view of the Standing Committee
that uniform guidelines may not be possible in respect of each
sanctuary or national park for maintaining ESZ. We are of the
opinion, however, that a minimum width of 1 km ESZ ought to be
maintained in respect of the protected forests, which forms part of
the recommendations of CEC in relation to Category B protected
forests. This would be the standard formula, subject to changes in
special circumstances. We have considered CEC's recommendation
that the ESZ should be relatable to the area covered by a protected
forest but the Standing Committee's view that the area of a
protected forest may not always be a reasonable criteria also merits
consideration. It was argued before us that the 1 km wide "no-
development-zone" may not be feasible in all cases and specific
instances were given for Sanjay Gandhi National Park and Guindy
National Park in Mumbai and Chennai metropolis respectively which
have urban activities in very close proximity. These sanctuaries shall
form special cases."
42. It is to be noted that an elaborate and exhaustive list has been
prepared by MoEF & CC of the activities which shall be prohibited, the
activities which shall be regulated and the activities which shall be
permitted.
43. In the application, it is stated that after the proposals are
received from the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations,
they are scrutinized in consultation with the Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun, and in case of tigen reserves, with the National Tiger
Conservation Authority. They are thereafter published in the Official
Gazette of the Central Government in both Hindi and English. They are
also placed in the public domain for 60 days for seeking comments of
concerned stakeholders. The comments so received are compiled and
scrutinized and observation of the concerned State Government/Union
Territory Administration is sought on the same. The aforesaid
requirements are in tune with the provisions of Rule 5 of 1986 Rules.
44. The application further states that the proposal is thereafter
placed before an Expert Committee constituted for ESZ within the MoEF
& CC. The said Committee comprises of the following:
(i) Indian Institute of Remote Sensing/Indian Space Research
Organization,
(ii) Ministry of Jal Shakti,
(iii) Ministry of Rural Development,
(iv) Forest Survey of India,
(v) Town & Country Planning Organization, Government of India,
(vi) National Tigen Conservation Authority,
(vii) Wildlife Institute of India,
(viii) GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development,
(ix) Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education,
(x) World Wildlife Fund,
(xi) Zoological Survey of India,
(xii) Botanical Survey of India,
(xiii) Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History (SACON).
45. It is further stated in the application that based on the
recommendation of the Expert Committee (ESZ), the Ministry finalizes
the notification of ESZs and after due legal vetting by the Ministry of
Law & Justice, final notifications specifying the ESZs around the
Protected Areas are notified. It could thus be seen that an elaborate
procedure including consideration by a Committee of Experts coming
from 13 organizations having expertise in wildlife ecology, forest etc. is
followed before a final notification prescribing ESZs is notified.
46. In the application filed by the Union of India, various
illustrations have been given to point out as to how if the directions
issued in paragraph 56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) are
not modified, a severe hardship would be caused to the millions of
people. We refer to the same hereunder:
(i) "The ESZ around Nagarjunasagar Srisailam Tiger Reserve in
Andhra Pradesh extends from O to 26 kilometres and 100 villages
are situated within it (Zero extent of ESZ is due to Krishna River
and interstate boundary with Telangana);
(ii) The ESZ around Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary, Valmiki National Park
and Valmiki Tiger Reserve in Bihar extends from o to 9 kilometres
and 323 villages are situated within it (zero extent of ESZ is
towards Western side sharing inter-state boundaries with Uttar
Pradesh and towards Northern side sharing international boundary
with Nepal);
(iii) The ESZ around Betla National Park, Palamau Wildlife Sanctuary,
and Mahuadann Wolf Sanctuary in Jharkhand extends from o to 9
kilometres and 382 villages are situated within it (Zero extent of
ESZ is due to Inter-State boundary);
(iv) The ESZ around Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary in Karnataka
extends from 1 to 14.5 kilometres and 107 villages are situated
within it;
(v) The ESZ around Kanha National Park and Phen Wildlife Sanctuary
in Madhya Pradesh extends from O to 30 kilometres and 168
villages are situated within it (Zero extent of Eco-sensitive Zone is
towards the eastern side having interstate boundary with
Chhattisgarh);
(vi) The ESZ around Tadoba-Andhari Tigen Reserve in Maharashtra
extends from 3 to 6 kilometres and 150 villages are situated
within it;
(vii) The ESZ around Jaisamand Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan
extends from 1.6 to 8.9 kilometres and 83 villages are situated in
it;
(viii) Even a small ESZ such as the one around Keoladeo National
Park in Rajasthan which extends from 0.5 to 1.5 kilometres has
22 villages situated in it.
47. It would thus reveal that in the ESZ around Nagarjunasagar
Srisailam Tiger Reserve in Andhra Pradesh, 100 villages are situated
within it. In the ESZ around Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary, Valmiki
National Park and Valmiki Tiger Reserve in Bihar, 323 villages are
situated within it. In the ESZ around Betla National Park, Palamau
Wildlife Sanctuary, and Mahuadanr Wolf Sanctuary in Jharkhand, 382
villages are situated within it. In the ESZ around Cauvery Wildlife
Sanctuary in Karnataka, 107 villages are situated within it. In the ESZ
around Kanha National Park and Phen Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya
Pradesh, 168 villages are situated within it. In the ESZ around Tadoba-
Andhari Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra, 150 villages are situated within
it. In the ESZ around Jaisamand Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan, 83
villages are situated in it. Even in a small ESZ around Keoladeo
National Park in Rajasthan, 22 villages situated in it.
48. If the direction as issued by this Court in paragraph 56.5 of the
order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is continued, then no permanent
structure would be permitted to come up for whatsoever purpose in the
aforesaid ESZs. As already pointed out from the aforesaid examples,
hundreds of villages are situated within the ESZs in the country. If no
permanent construction is to be permitted for any purpose, a villager
who is desirous to reconstruct his house would not be permitted.
Similarly, if there is an extension in their family and some additional
construction is required for accommodating the enlarged family, the
same would also not be permitted. Similarly, if the Government decides
to construct schools, dispensaries, anganwadis, village stores, water
tanks and other basic structures for improvement of the life of the
villagers, the same would also not be permitted. The effect of the order
will be to prevent the State or the Central Government from
constructing roads and provide other facilities to the villagers.
49. If the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is not modified, it will
also be impossible for the Forest Departments to conduct eco-
development activities around National Parks and Sanctuaries. The said
activities are required with the dual objectives of protection of wildlife
and provision of benefits for the local communities. MoEF & CC provides
financial assistance to the States under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme-Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats, which includes
assistance for eco-development activities. These activities often involve
construction of small structures which are permanent in nature in areas
including ESZs. For example, the said activities which are likely to be
prohibited are thus:
(i) The construction of community halls, bridges, threshing floors,
fish-drying platforms, drinking water storage, etc., for the benefit
of local communities/villages;
(ii)
The construction of forest chowkies, watch towers, and other
structures for protection of wildlife and forests;
(iii) The construction of interpretation centres, toilets and other basic
structures for the environmental education of visitors to National
Parks and sanctuaries.
50. It is further to be noted that there are various regulated and
permissible activities. There are also certain projects of national and
strategic importance such as construction of National Highways,
Railways, Defence related infrastructure etc. The effect of the direction
in 56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is that all such
activities will be permanently prohibited. In this respect, it is to be
noted that MoEF & CC has issued an Office Memorandum dated 17th
May 2022 which required that any activity listed in Schedule of the EIA
Notification 2006, when conducted in a notified ESZs, or in the case of
National Parks and Sanctuaries for which no ESZ has been finally
notified, when conducted within 10 kilometres of such National Park or
Sanctuary, requires the consideration and recommendation of the
NBWL or its Standing Committee in addition to the Environment
Clearance under the 1986 Act. Additionally, activities which are
regulated as per the specific ESZ notification, require approval as per
that notification. As such, we find that there are inbuilt safeguards for
preventing rampant construction and abuse of process which may be
detrimental to the development and maintenance of wildlife habitats. It
is further to be noted that if the direction as contained in paragraph
56.5 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) that even for
continuation of existing activities, the permission of the PCCF of each
State or Union Territory would be necessary, remains unmodified,
taking into consideration that in each State or Union Territory there will
be hundreds of villages wherein millions of people would be residing,
the PCCF would be left with no other job except to consider such
applications for permission to continue such activities. Even a farmer
desirous to continue farming activities would be required to seek such
permission. We find that such a direction is impossible to be
implemented.
51. We are of the view that if such a direction is continued, rather
than avoiding man-animal conflict, it will intensify the same. As
observed in the said Guidelines, the requirement of declaring ESZs is
not to hamper day to day activities of the citizens but is meant to
protect the precious forests/Protected Areas from any negative impact,
and to refine the environment around the Protected Areas.
52. As already discussed hereinabove, the necessity to have ESZs is
to provide a buffen zone around the Protected Areas. The rights of the
villagers residing in the Protected Areas are required to be settled in
accordance with the provisions contained in the 1972 Act and such
villagers are rehabilitated outside the Protected Areas. However, no
such settlement of rights is available to the villagers residing in the
ESZs areas. As stated in the said Guidelines, the purpose of declaring
ESZs is not to hamper the day to day activities of the citizens. If the
direction as issued is continued, it would certainly hamper the day to
day activities of the citizens residing in ESZs. As such, we find that the
said direction needs to be modified.
53. It is further to be noted that the NBWL, in its meeting dated 17th
March 2005, has also recommended that the delineation of ESZs should
project as regulation rather than prohibition of activities.
54. As was pointed out by the counsel for one of the States, the
entire municipal area of the Sulthan Bathery Block Panchayat is
situated within the ESZ area.
55. Insofar as direction in paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3rd
June 2022 (supra) is concerned, a perusal of various orders would
reveal that this Court has not directed any minimum area from the
demarcated boundary of such Protected Areas. The area to be declared
as ESZ cannot be uniform and will be Protected Area specific. In some
cases, it may be 10 kilometres on one side and 500 meters on the other
side. In certain cases, it may not be possible to have a uniform
minimum area by virtue of inter-state boundaries or a sea or a river
beyond one side of the Protected Area. In any case, a detailed
procedure is required to be followed as prescribed under Rule 5 of the
1986 Rules which we have already referred hereinabove. We find that
once such a notification is issued after following the procedure
prescribed under the 1986 Rules, the ESZs will have to be as per the
said notification.
56. It is further to be noted that, as required under sub-rule (3) of
Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules, before any final notification is issued, a draft
notification is required to be published in the Official Gazette and in
such other manner as the Central Government may deem necessary
from time to time. Any person interested in filing any objection to such
a draft notification is entitled to file objection within a period of 60 days
from the date of publication of the draft notification in the Official
Gazette. We find that the Central Government can be directed to give a
wide publicity to the draft notification so that all persons interested
have knowledge about issuance of such draft notification.
57. It is pertinent to note that after following the aforesaid
procedure, the matter is placed before the Expert Committee consisting
of 13 organizations having expertise in the relative field. As such,
before an ESZ area is specified, various factors are taken into
consideration. There are various factors which will determine the ESZs
for a particular Protected Area. The circumstances may differ from one
Protected Area to another Protected Area. As such, we find that the
direction which prescribes a uniform one kilometre ESZ requires to be
modified.
58. It is further to be noted that on the date of filing of the present
application, final notifications have been issued in respect of 474
Protected Areas whereas draft notifications have been issued in respect
of 102 Protected Areas. 73 proposals are pending. As already discussed
hereinabove, this Court has already found the said Guidelines to be
reasonable and has accepted the same. The Court has also accepted the
view of the Standing Committee of the NBWL that uniform guidelines
may not be possible in respect of each Sanctuary or National Park for
maintaining ESZs. Though the Court has observed that a minimum
width of one kilometre in ESZ ought to be maintained, in paragraph
56.6 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) itself, it has observed
that minimum width of the ESZ may be diluted in overwhelming public
interest but for that purpose the State or Union Territory concerned is
required to approach Central Empowered Committee (CEC) and MoEF &
CC. It has further observed that both these bodies shall give their
respective recommendations before this Court and on that basis, the
Court should pass appropriate order.
59. As already discussed hereinabove, the ESZs are required to be
notified after following the procedure as prescribed under the 1986
Rules and the said Guidelines. Such notifications cannot be issued
unless a close scrutiny at various levels including the scrutiny by Expert
Committee consisting of experts from 13 organizations. As such, we
find that the direction as contained in paragraph 56.6 of the order
dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) also needs to be modified.
60. Insofar as the restriction on mining is concerned, we are of the
considered view that it has been the consistent view of this Court that
the mining activities within an area of one kilometre of the boundary of
the Protected Areas will be hazardous for the wildlife. Though in the
case of Goa Foundation (supra), the said directions were issued in
respect of State of Goa, we find that such directions need to be issued
on Pan-India basis.
61. We are therefore inclined to allow the present I.A. The direction
in paragraph 56.1 of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) is modified
and clarified that the directions contained therein would not be
applicable to the ESZs in respect of which a draft and final notification
has been issued by the MoEF & CC and in respect of the proposals
which have been received by the Ministry.
62. We, however, direct the Central Government that wide publicity
should be given to the draft notification which is required to be
published under the provisions of clause (a) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of
the 1986 Rules. We further direct that the final notification to be
published under clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the 1986 Rules
shall not be given effect for a period of 30 days from the date of
issuance thereof.
It is further directed that any person who is aggrieved with such
a final notification would be entitled to approach this Court directly by
filing an application in the present proceedings.
64. We further clarify that the direction contained in paragraph 56.1
of the order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) would not be applicable where
the National Parks and Sanctuaries are located on inter-State borders
and/or share common boundaries.
65. We also modify the direction contained in paragraph 56.4 of the
order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) and direct that mining within the
National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary and within an area of one
kilometre from the boundary of such National Park and Wildlife
Sanctuary shall not be permissible.
66. We also modify the directions contained in paragraph 56.5 of the
order dated 3rd June 2022 (supra) and replace the same as under:
(i) The MoEF & CC and all the State/Union Territory Governments
shall strictly follow the provisions in the said Guidelines dated 9th
February 2011 and so also the provisions contained in the ESZs
notifications pertaining to the respective Protected Areas with
regard to prohibited activities, regulated activities and permissible
activities;
(ii) We further direct that while granting Environmental and Forest
Clearances for project activities in ESZ and other areas outside
the Protected Areas, the Union of India as well as various
State/Union Territory Governments shall strictly follow the
provisions contained in the Office Memorandum dated 17th May
2022 issued by MoEF & CC.
67. All the other present .As shall stand disposed of in terms of the
above. No costs.
1
2
3
4
5
6